ALEXANDER’S BRIDGE

Late one brilliant April afternoon Professor Lucius Wilson stood at the
head of Chestnut Street, looking about him with the pleased air of a man
of taste who does not very often get to Boston. He had lived there as a
student, but for twenty years and more, since he had been Professor of
Philosophy in a Western university, he had seldom come East except to
take a steamer for some foreign port. Wilson was standing quite still,
contemplating with a whimsical smile the slanting street, with its worn
paving, its irregular, gravely colored houses, and the row of naked
trees on which the thin sunlight was still shining. The gleam of the
river at the foot of the hill made him blink a little, not so much
because it was too bright as because he found it so pleasant. The few
passers-by glanced at him unconcernedly, and even the children who
hurried along with their school-bags under their arms seemed to find it
perfectly natural that a tall brown gentleman should be standing there,
looking up through his glasses at the gray housetops.

The sun sank rapidly; the silvery light had faded from the bare boughs
and the watery twilight was setting in when Wilson at last walked down
the hill, descending into cooler and cooler depths of grayish shadow.
His nostril, long unused to it, was quick to detect the smell of wood
smoke in the air, blended with the odor of moist spring earth and the
saltiness that came up the river with the tide. He crossed Charles
Street between jangling street cars and shelving lumber drays, and after
a moment of uncertainty wound into Brimmer Street. The street was quiet,
deserted, and hung with a thin bluish haze. He had already fixed his
sharp eye upon the house which he reasoned should be his objective
point, when he noticed a woman approaching rapidly from the opposite
direction. Always an interested observer of women, Wilson would have
slackened his pace anywhere to follow this one with his impersonal,
appreciative glance. She was a person of distinction he saw at once,
and, moreover, very handsome. She was tall, carried her beautiful head
proudly, and moved with ease and certainty. One immediately took for
granted the costly privileges and fine spaces that must lie in the
background from which such a figure could emerge with this rapid and
elegant gait. Wilson noted her dress, too,--for, in his way, he had an
eye for such things,--particularly her brown furs and her hat. He got
a blurred impression of her fine color, the violets she wore, her white
gloves, and, curiously enough, of her veil, as she turned up a flight of
steps in front of him and disappeared.

Wilson was able to enjoy lovely things that passed him on the wing as
completely and deliberately as if they had been dug-up marvels, long
anticipated, and definitely fixed at the end of a railway journey. For
a few pleasurable seconds he quite forgot where he was going, and only
after the door had closed behind her did he realize that the young woman
had entered the house to which he had directed his trunk from the South
Station that morning. He hesitated a moment before mounting the steps.
“Can that,” he murmured in amazement,--“can that possibly have been Mrs.
Alexander ?”

When the servant admitted him, Mrs. Alexander was still standing in the
hallway. She heard him give his name, and came forward holding out her
hand.

“Is it you, indeed, Professor Wilson ? I was afraid that you might get
here before I did. I was detained at a concert, and Bartley telephoned
that he would be late. Thomas will show you your room. Had you rather
have your tea brought to you there, or will you have it down here with
me, while we wait for Bartley ?”

Wilson was pleased to find that he had been the cause of her rapid walk,
and with her he was even more vastly pleased than before. He followed
her through the drawing-room into the library, where the wide back
windows looked out upon the garden and the sunset and a fine stretch
of silver-colored river. A harp-shaped elm stood stripped against the
pale-colored evening sky, with ragged last year’s birds’ nests in its
forks, and through the bare branches the evening star quivered in the
misty air. The long brown room breathed the peace of a rich and amply
guarded quiet. Tea was brought in immediately and placed in front of the
wood fire. Mrs. Alexander sat down in a high-backed chair and began to
pour it, while Wilson sank into a low seat opposite her and took his cup
with a great sense of ease and harmony and comfort.

“You have had a long journey, haven’t you ?” Mrs. Alexander asked, after
showing gracious concern about his tea. “And I am so sorry Bartley is
late. He’s often tired when he’s late. He flatters himself that it is
a little on his account that you have come to this Congress of
Psychologists.”

“It is,” Wilson assented, selecting his muffin carefully; “and I hope he
won’t be tired tonight. But, on my own account, I’m glad to have a few
moments alone with you, before Bartley comes. I was somehow afraid that
my knowing him so well would not put me in the way of getting to know
you.”

“That’s very nice of you.” She nodded at him above her cup and smiled,
but there was a little formal tightness in her tone which had not been
there when she greeted him in the hall.

Wilson leaned forward. “Have I said something awkward ? I live very far
out of the world, you know. But I didn’t mean that you would exactly
fade dim, even if Bartley were here.”

Mrs. Alexander laughed relentingly. “Oh, I’m not so vain! How terribly
discerning you are.”

She looked straight at Wilson, and he felt that this quick, frank glance
brought about an understanding between them.

He liked everything about her, he told himself, but he particularly
liked her eyes; when she looked at one directly for a moment they were
like a glimpse of fine windy sky that may bring all sorts of weather.

“Since you noticed something,” Mrs. Alexander went on, “it must have
been a flash of the distrust I have come to feel whenever I meet any of
the people who knew Bartley when he was a boy. It is always as if they
were talking of someone I had never met. Really, Professor Wilson, it
would seem that he grew up among the strangest people. They usually say
that he has turned out very well, or remark that he always was a fine
fellow. I never know what reply to make.”

Wilson chuckled and leaned back in his chair, shaking his left foot
gently. “I expect the fact is that we none of us knew him very well,
Mrs. Alexander. Though I will say for myself that I was always confident
he’d do something extraordinary.”

Mrs. Alexander’s shoulders gave a slight movement, suggestive of
impatience. “Oh, I should think that might have been a safe prediction.
Another cup, please ?”

“Yes, thank you. But predicting, in the case of boys, is not so easy as
you might imagine, Mrs. Alexander. Some get a bad hurt early and lose
their courage; and some never get a fair wind. Bartley”--he dropped his
chin on the back of his long hand and looked at her admiringly--“Bartley
caught the wind early, and it has sung in his sails ever since.”

Mrs. Alexander sat looking into the fire with intent preoccupation, and
Wilson studied her half-averted face. He liked the suggestion of stormy
possibilities in the proud curve of her lip and nostril. Without that,
he reflected, she would be too cold.

“I should like to know what he was really like when he was a boy. I
don’t believe he remembers,” she said suddenly. “Won’t you smoke, Mr.
Wilson ?”

Wilson lit a cigarette. “No, I don’t suppose he does. He was never
introspective. He was simply the most tremendous response to stimuli I
have ever known. We didn’t know exactly what to do with him.”

A servant came in and noiselessly removed the tea-tray. Mrs. Alexander
screened her face from the firelight, which was beginning to throw
wavering bright spots on her dress and hair as the dusk deepened.

“Of course,” she said, “I now and again hear stories about things that
happened when he was in college.”

“But that isn’t what you want.” Wilson wrinkled his brows and looked at
her with the smiling familiarity that had come about so quickly. “What
you want is a picture of him, standing back there at the other end of
twenty years. You want to look down through my memory.”

She dropped her hands in her lap. “Yes, yes; that’s exactly what I
want.”

At this moment they heard the front door shut with a jar, and Wilson
laughed as Mrs. Alexander rose quickly. “There he is. Away with
perspective! No past, no future for Bartley; just the fiery moment. The
only moment that ever was or will be in the world!”

The door from the hall opened, a voice called “Winifred ?” hurriedly,
and a big man came through the drawing-room with a quick, heavy tread,
bringing with him a smell of cigar smoke and chill out-of-doors air.
When Alexander reached the library door, he switched on the lights
and stood six feet and more in the archway, glowing with strength
and cordiality and rugged, blond good looks. There were other
bridge-builders in the world, certainly, but it was always Alexander’s
picture that the Sunday Supplement men wanted, because he looked as a
tamer of rivers ought to look. Under his tumbled sandy hair his head
seemed as hard and powerful as a catapult, and his shoulders looked
strong enough in themselves to support a span of any one of his ten
great bridges that cut the air above as many rivers.


After dinner Alexander took Wilson up to his study. It was a large room
over the library, and looked out upon the black river and the row of
white lights along the Cambridge Embankment. The room was not at all
what one might expect of an engineer’s study. Wilson felt at once
the harmony of beautiful things that have lived long together without
obtrusions of ugliness or change. It was none of Alexander’s doing, of
course; those warm consonances of color had been blending and mellowing
before he was born. But the wonder was that he was not out of place
there,--that it all seemed to glow like the inevitable background for
his vigor and vehemence. He sat before the fire, his shoulders deep in
the cushions of his chair, his powerful head upright, his hair rumpled
above his broad forehead. He sat heavily, a cigar in his large, smooth
hand, a flush of after-dinner color in his face, which wind and sun and
exposure to all sorts of weather had left fair and clear-skinned.

“You are off for England on Saturday, Bartley, Mrs. Alexander tells me.”

“Yes, for a few weeks only. There’s a meeting of British engineers, and
I’m doing another bridge in Canada, you know.”

“Oh, every one knows about that. And it was in Canada that you met your
wife, wasn’t it ?”

“Yes, at Allway. She was visiting her great-aunt there. A most remarkable
old lady. I was working with MacKeller then, an old Scotch engineer who
had picked me up in London and taken me back to Quebec with him. He had
the contract for the Allway Bridge, but before he began work on it he
found out that he was going to die, and he advised the committee to turn
the job over to me. Otherwise I’d never have got anything good so early.
MacKeller was an old friend of Mrs. Pemberton, Winifred’s aunt. He had
mentioned me to her, so when I went to Allway she asked me to come to
see her. She was a wonderful old lady.”

“Like her niece ?” Wilson queried.

Bartley laughed. “She had been very handsome, but not in Winifred’s way.
When I knew her she was little and fragile, very pink and white, with
a splendid head and a face like fine old lace, somehow,--but perhaps I
always think of that because she wore a lace scarf on her hair. She had
such a flavor of life about her. She had known Gordon and Livingstone
and Beaconsfield when she was young,--every one. She was the first woman
of that sort I’d ever known. You know how it is in the West,--old people
are poked out of the way. Aunt Eleanor fascinated me as few young women
have ever done. I used to go up from the works to have tea with her, and
sit talking to her for hours. It was very stimulating, for she couldn’t
tolerate stupidity.”

“It must have been then that your luck began, Bartley,” said Wilson,
flicking his cigar ash with his long finger. “It’s curious, watching
boys,” he went on reflectively. “I’m sure I did you justice in the
matter of ability. Yet I always used to feel that there was a weak spot
where some day strain would tell. Even after you began to climb, I stood
down in the crowd and watched you with--well, not with confidence. The
more dazzling the front you presented, the higher your facade rose, the
more I expected to see a big crack zigzagging from top to bottom,”--he
indicated its course in the air with his forefinger,--“then a crash and
clouds of dust. It was curious. I had such a clear picture of it. And
another curious thing, Bartley,” Wilson spoke with deliberateness and
settled deeper into his chair, “is that I don’t feel it any longer. I am
sure of you.”

Alexander laughed. “Nonsense! It’s not I you feel sure of; it’s
Winifred. People often make that mistake.”

“No, I’m serious, Alexander. You’ve changed. You have decided to leave
some birds in the bushes. You used to want them all.”

Alexander’s chair creaked. “I still want a good many,” he said rather
gloomily. “After all, life doesn’t offer a man much. You work like the
devil and think you’re getting on, and suddenly you discover that you’ve
only been getting yourself tied up. A million details drink you dry.
Your life keeps going for things you don’t want, and all the while
you are being built alive into a social structure you don’t care a rap
about. I sometimes wonder what sort of chap I’d have been if I hadn’t
been this sort; I want to go and live out his potentialities, too. I
haven’t forgotten that there are birds in the bushes.”

Bartley stopped and sat frowning into the fire, his shoulders thrust
forward as if he were about to spring at something. Wilson watched him,
wondering. His old pupil always stimulated him at first, and then vastly
wearied him. The machinery was always pounding away in this man, and
Wilson preferred companions of a more reflective habit of mind. He could
not help feeling that there were unreasoning and unreasonable activities
going on in Alexander all the while; that even after dinner, when most
men achieve a decent impersonality, Bartley had merely closed the door
of the engine-room and come up for an airing. The machinery itself was
still pounding on.

Bartley’s abstraction and Wilson’s reflections were cut short by a
rustle at the door, and almost before they could rise Mrs. Alexander was
standing by the hearth. Alexander brought a chair for her, but she shook
her head.

“No, dear, thank you. I only came in to see whether you and Professor
Wilson were quite comfortable. I am going down to the music-room.”

“Why not practice here ? Wilson and I are growing very dull. We are tired
of talk.”

“Yes, I beg you, Mrs. Alexander,” Wilson began, but he got no further.

“Why, certainly, if you won’t find me too noisy. I am working on the
Schumann `Carnival,’ and, though I don’t practice a great many hours,
I am very methodical,” Mrs. Alexander explained, as she crossed to an
upright piano that stood at the back of the room, near the windows.

Wilson followed, and, having seen her seated, dropped into a chair
behind her. She played brilliantly and with great musical feeling.
Wilson could not imagine her permitting herself to do anything badly,
but he was surprised at the cleanness of her execution. He wondered how
a woman with so many duties had managed to keep herself up to a standard
really professional. It must take a great deal of time, certainly, and
Bartley must take a great deal of time. Wilson reflected that he had
never before known a woman who had been able, for any considerable
while, to support both a personal and an intellectual passion. Sitting
behind her, he watched her with perplexed admiration, shading his eyes
with his hand. In her dinner dress she looked even younger than in
street clothes, and, for all her composure and self-sufficiency, she
seemed to him strangely alert and vibrating, as if in her, too, there
were something never altogether at rest. He felt that he knew pretty
much what she demanded in people and what she demanded from life, and he
wondered how she squared Bartley. After ten years she must know him;
and however one took him, however much one admired him, one had to admit
that he simply wouldn’t square. He was a natural force, certainly, but
beyond that, Wilson felt, he was not anything very really or for very
long at a time.

Wilson glanced toward the fire, where Bartley’s profile was still
wreathed in cigar smoke that curled up more and more slowly. His
shoulders were sunk deep in the cushions and one hand hung large and
passive over the arm of his chair. He had slipped on a purple velvet
smoking-coat. His wife, Wilson surmised, had chosen it. She was clearly
very proud of his good looks and his fine color. But, with the glow of
an immediate interest gone out of it, the engineer’s face looked tired,
even a little haggard. The three lines in his forehead, directly above
the nose, deepened as he sat thinking, and his powerful head drooped
forward heavily. Although Alexander was only forty-three, Wilson thought
that beneath his vigorous color he detected the dulling weariness of
on-coming middle age.


The next afternoon, at the hour when the river was beginning to
redden under the declining sun, Wilson again found himself facing Mrs.
Alexander at the tea-table in the library.

“Well,” he remarked, when he was bidden to give an account of himself,
“there was a long morning with the psychologists, luncheon with Bartley
at his club, more psychologists, and here I am. I’ve looked forward to
this hour all day.”

Mrs. Alexander smiled at him across the vapor from the kettle. “And do
you remember where we stopped yesterday ?”

“Perfectly. I was going to show you a picture. But I doubt whether I
have color enough in me. Bartley makes me feel a faded monochrome. You
can’t get at the young Bartley except by means of color.” Wilson paused
and deliberated. Suddenly he broke out: “He wasn’t a remarkable student,
you know, though he was always strong in higher mathematics. His work
in my own department was quite ordinary. It was as a powerfully equipped
nature that I found him interesting. That is the most interesting thing
a teacher can find. It has the fascination of a scientific discovery. We
come across other pleasing and endearing qualities so much oftener than
we find force.”

“And, after all,” said Mrs. Alexander, “that is the thing we all live
upon. It is the thing that takes us forward.”

Wilson thought she spoke a little wistfully. “Exactly,” he assented
warmly. “It builds the bridges into the future, over which the feet of
every one of us will go.”

“How interested I am to hear you put it in that way. The bridges into
the future--I often say that to myself. Bartley’s bridges always seem to
me like that. Have you ever seen his first suspension bridge in Canada,
the one he was doing when I first knew him ? I hope you will see it
sometime. We were married as soon as it was finished, and you will laugh
when I tell you that it always has a rather bridal look to me. It is
over the wildest river, with mists and clouds always battling about it,
and it is as delicate as a cobweb hanging in the sky. It really was
a bridge into the future. You have only to look at it to feel that it
meant the beginning of a great career. But I have a photograph of it
here.” She drew a portfolio from behind a bookcase. “And there, you see,
on the hill, is my aunt’s house.”

Wilson took up the photograph. “Bartley was telling me something about
your aunt last night. She must have been a delightful person.”

Winifred laughed. “The bridge, you see, was just at the foot of the
hill, and the noise of the engines annoyed her very much at first. But
after she met Bartley she pretended to like it, and said it was a good
thing to be reminded that there were things going on in the world. She
loved life, and Bartley brought a great deal of it in to her when
he came to the house. Aunt Eleanor was very worldly in a frank,
Early-Victorian manner. She liked men of action, and disliked young
men who were careful of themselves and who, as she put it, were always
trimming their wick as if they were afraid of their oil’s giving out.
MacKeller, Bartley’s first chief, was an old friend of my aunt, and
he told her that Bartley was a wild, ill-governed youth, which really
pleased her very much. I remember we were sitting alone in the dusk
after Bartley had been there for the first time. I knew that Aunt
Eleanor had found him much to her taste, but she hadn’t said anything.
Presently she came out, with a chuckle: `MacKeller found him sowing
wild oats in London, I believe. I hope he didn’t stop him too soon. Life
coquets with dashing fellows. The coming men are always like that. We
must have him to dinner, my dear.’ And we did. She grew much fonder
of Bartley than she was of me. I had been studying in Vienna, and she
thought that absurd. She was interested in the army and in politics, and
she had a great contempt for music and art and philosophy. She used to
declare that the Prince Consort had brought all that stuff over out of
Germany. She always sniffed when Bartley asked me to play for him. She
considered that a newfangled way of making a match of it.”

When Alexander came in a few moments later, he found Wilson and his wife
still confronting the photograph. “Oh, let us get that out of the way,”
 he said, laughing. “Winifred, Thomas can bring my trunk down. I’ve
decided to go over to New York to-morrow night and take a fast boat. I
shall save two days.”



CHAPTER II


On the night of his arrival in London, Alexander went immediately to the
hotel on the Embankment at which he always stopped, and in the lobby he
was accosted by an old acquaintance, Maurice Mainhall, who fell upon him
with effusive cordiality and indicated a willingness to dine with him.
Bartley never dined alone if he could help it, and Mainhall was a good
gossip who always knew what had been going on in town; especially, he
knew everything that was not printed in the newspapers. The nephew of
one of the standard Victorian novelists, Mainhall bobbed about among the
various literary cliques of London and its outlying suburbs, careful to
lose touch with none of them. He had written a number of books himself;
among them a “History of Dancing,” a “History of Costume,” a “Key to
Shakespeare’s Sonnets,” a study of “The Poetry of Ernest Dowson,” etc.
Although Mainhall’s enthusiasm was often tiresome, and although he was
often unable to distinguish between facts and vivid figments of his
imagination, his imperturbable good nature overcame even the people whom
he bored most, so that they ended by becoming, in a reluctant manner,
his friends. In appearance, Mainhall was astonishingly like the
conventional stage-Englishman of American drama: tall and thin, with
high, hitching shoulders and a small head glistening with closely
brushed yellow hair. He spoke with an extreme Oxford accent, and when he
was talking well, his face sometimes wore the rapt expression of a very
emotional man listening to music. Mainhall liked Alexander because he
was an engineer. He had preconceived ideas about everything, and his
idea about Americans was that they should be engineers or mechanics. He
hated them when they presumed to be anything else.

While they sat at dinner Mainhall acquainted Bartley with the fortunes
of his old friends in London, and as they left the table he proposed
that they should go to see Hugh MacConnell’s new comedy, “Bog Lights.”

“It’s really quite the best thing MacConnell’s done,” he explained as
they got into a hansom. “It’s tremendously well put on, too. Florence
Merrill and Cyril Henderson. But Hilda Burgoyne’s the hit of the piece.
Hugh’s written a delightful part for her, and she’s quite inexpressible.
It’s been on only two weeks, and I’ve been half a dozen times already.
I happen to have MacConnell’s box for tonight or there’d be no chance of
our getting places. There’s everything in seeing Hilda while she’s fresh
in a part. She’s apt to grow a bit stale after a time. The ones who have
any imagination do.”

“Hilda Burgoyne!” Alexander exclaimed mildly. “Why, I haven’t heard of
her for--years.”

Mainhall laughed. “Then you can’t have heard much at all, my dear
Alexander. It’s only lately, since MacConnell and his set have got hold
of her, that she’s come up. Myself, I always knew she had it in her. If
we had one real critic in London--but what can one expect ? Do you know,
Alexander,”--Mainhall looked with perplexity up into the top of the
hansom and rubbed his pink cheek with his gloved finger,--“do you know,
I sometimes think of taking to criticism seriously myself. In a way, it
would be a sacrifice; but, dear me, we do need some one.”

Just then they drove up to the Duke of York’s, so Alexander did not
commit himself, but followed Mainhall into the theatre. When they
entered the stage-box on the left the first act was well under way, the
scene being the interior of a cabin in the south of Ireland. As they sat
down, a burst of applause drew Alexander’s attention to the stage. Miss
Burgoyne and her donkey were thrusting their heads in at the half door.
“After all,” he reflected, “there’s small probability of her recognizing
me. She doubtless hasn’t thought of me for years.” He felt the
enthusiasm of the house at once, and in a few moments he was caught up
by the current of MacConnell’s irresistible comedy. The audience
had come forewarned, evidently, and whenever the ragged slip of a
donkey-girl ran upon the stage there was a deep murmur of approbation,
every one smiled and glowed, and Mainhall hitched his heavy chair a
little nearer the brass railing.

“You see,” he murmured in Alexander’s ear, as the curtain fell on
the first act, “one almost never sees a part like that done without
smartness or mawkishness. Of course, Hilda is Irish,--the Burgoynes have
been stage people for generations,--and she has the Irish voice. It’s
delightful to hear it in a London theatre. That laugh, now, when she
doubles over at the hips--who ever heard it out of Galway ? She saves
her hand, too. She’s at her best in the second act. She’s really
MacConnell’s poetic motif, you see; makes the whole thing a fairy tale.”

The second act opened before Philly Doyle’s underground still, with
Peggy and her battered donkey come in to smuggle a load of potheen
across the bog, and to bring Philly word of what was doing in the world
without, and of what was happening along the roadsides and ditches with
the first gleam of fine weather. Alexander, annoyed by Mainhall’s sighs
and exclamations, watched her with keen, half-skeptical interest. As
Mainhall had said, she was the second act; the plot and feeling alike
depended upon her lightness of foot, her lightness of touch, upon the
shrewdness and deft fancifulness that played alternately, and sometimes
together, in her mirthful brown eyes. When she began to dance, by way of
showing the gossoons what she had seen in the fairy rings at night, the
house broke into a prolonged uproar. After her dance she withdrew from
the dialogue and retreated to the ditch wall back of Philly’s burrow,
where she sat singing “The Rising of the Moon” and making a wreath of
primroses for her donkey.

When the act was over Alexander and Mainhall strolled out into the
corridor. They met a good many acquaintances; Mainhall, indeed, knew
almost every one, and he babbled on incontinently, screwing his small
head about over his high collar. Presently he hailed a tall, bearded
man, grim-browed and rather battered-looking, who had his opera cloak
on his arm and his hat in his hand, and who seemed to be on the point of
leaving the theatre.

“MacConnell, let me introduce Mr. Bartley Alexander. I say! It’s going
famously to-night, Mac. And what an audience! You’ll never do anything
like this again, mark me. A man writes to the top of his bent only
once.”

The playwright gave Mainhall a curious look out of his deep-set faded
eyes and made a wry face. “And have I done anything so fool as that,
now ?” he asked.

“That’s what I was saying,” Mainhall lounged a little nearer and dropped
into a tone even more conspicuously confidential. “And you’ll never
bring Hilda out like this again. Dear me, Mac, the girl couldn’t
possibly be better, you know.”

MacConnell grunted. “She’ll do well enough if she keeps her pace and
doesn’t go off on us in the middle of the season, as she’s more than
like to do.”

He nodded curtly and made for the door, dodging acquaintances as he
went.

“Poor old Hugh,” Mainhall murmured. “He’s hit terribly hard. He’s been
wanting to marry Hilda these three years and more. She doesn’t take up
with anybody, you know. Irene Burgoyne, one of her family, told me in
confidence that there was a romance somewhere back in the beginning. One
of your countrymen, Alexander, by the way; an American student whom she
met in Paris, I believe. I dare say it’s quite true that there’s never
been any one else.” Mainhall vouched for her constancy with a loftiness
that made Alexander smile, even while a kind of rapid excitement was
tingling through him. Blinking up at the lights, Mainhall added in
his luxurious, worldly way: “She’s an elegant little person, and quite
capable of an extravagant bit of sentiment like that. Here comes Sir
Harry Towne. He’s another who’s awfully keen about her. Let me introduce
you. Sir Harry Towne, Mr. Bartley Alexander, the American engineer.”

Sir Harry Towne bowed and said that he had met Mr. Alexander and his
wife in Tokyo.

Mainhall cut in impatiently.

“I say, Sir Harry, the little girl’s going famously to-night, isn’t
she ?”

Sir Harry wrinkled his brows judiciously. “Do you know, I thought the
dance a bit conscious to-night, for the first time. The fact is, she’s
feeling rather seedy, poor child. Westmere and I were back after the
first act, and we thought she seemed quite uncertain of herself. A
little attack of nerves, possibly.”

He bowed as the warning bell rang, and Mainhall whispered: “You know
Lord Westmere, of course,--the stooped man with the long gray mustache,
talking to Lady Dowle. Lady Westmere is very fond of Hilda.”

When they reached their box the house was darkened and the orchestra
was playing “The Cloak of Old Gaul.” In a moment Peggy was on the stage
again, and Alexander applauded vigorously with the rest. He even leaned
forward over the rail a little. For some reason he felt pleased and
flattered by the enthusiasm of the audience. In the half-light he looked
about at the stalls and boxes and smiled a little consciously, recalling
with amusement Sir Harry’s judicial frown. He was beginning to feel a
keen interest in the slender, barefoot donkey-girl who slipped in and
out of the play, singing, like some one winding through a hilly field.
He leaned forward and beamed felicitations as warmly as Mainhall himself
when, at the end of the play, she came again and again before the
curtain, panting a little and flushed, her eyes dancing and her eager,
nervous little mouth tremulous with excitement.

When Alexander returned to his hotel--he shook Mainhall at the door of
the theatre--he had some supper brought up to his room, and it was late
before he went to bed. He had not thought of Hilda Burgoyne for years;
indeed, he had almost forgotten her. He had last written to her from
Canada, after he first met Winifred, telling her that everything was
changed with him--that he had met a woman whom he would marry if he
could; if he could not, then all the more was everything changed for
him. Hilda had never replied to his letter. He felt guilty and unhappy
about her for a time, but after Winifred promised to marry him he really
forgot Hilda altogether. When he wrote her that everything was changed
for him, he was telling the truth. After he met Winifred Pemberton he
seemed to himself like a different man. One night when he and Winifred
were sitting together on the bridge, he told her that things had
happened while he was studying abroad that he was sorry for,--one thing
in particular,--and he asked her whether she thought she ought to know
about them. She considered a moment and then said “No, I think not,
though I am glad you ask me. You see, one can’t be jealous about things
in general; but about particular, definite, personal things,”--here
she had thrown her hands up to his shoulders with a quick, impulsive
gesture--“oh, about those I should be very jealous. I should torture
myself--I couldn’t help it.” After that it was easy to forget, actually
to forget. He wondered to-night, as he poured his wine, how many times
he had thought of Hilda in the last ten years. He had been in London
more or less, but he had never happened to hear of her. “All the same,”
 he lifted his glass, “here’s to you, little Hilda. You’ve made things
come your way, and I never thought you’d do it.

“Of course,” he reflected, “she always had that combination of something
homely and sensible, and something utterly wild and daft. But I never
thought she’d do anything. She hadn’t much ambition then, and she was
too fond of trifles. She must care about the theatre a great deal more
than she used to. Perhaps she has me to thank for something, after
all. Sometimes a little jolt like that does one good. She was a daft,
generous little thing. I’m glad she’s held her own since. After all,
we were awfully young. It was youth and poverty and proximity, and
everything was young and kindly. I shouldn’t wonder if she could laugh
about it with me now. I shouldn’t wonder-- But they’ve probably spoiled
her, so that she’d be tiresome if one met her again.”

Bartley smiled and yawned and went to bed.



CHAPTER III


The next evening Alexander dined alone at a club, and at about nine
o’clock he dropped in at the Duke of York’s. The house was sold out
and he stood through the second act. When he returned to his hotel he
examined the new directory, and found Miss Burgoyne’s address still
given as off Bedford Square, though at a new number. He remembered that,
in so far as she had been brought up at all, she had been brought up in
Bloomsbury. Her father and mother played in the provinces most of the
year, and she was left a great deal in the care of an old aunt who was
crippled by rheumatism and who had had to leave the stage altogether. In
the days when Alexander knew her, Hilda always managed to have a lodging
of some sort about Bedford Square, because she clung tenaciously to such
scraps and shreds of memories as were connected with it. The mummy
room of the British Museum had been one of the chief delights of her
childhood. That forbidding pile was the goal of her truant fancy, and
she was sometimes taken there for a treat, as other children are taken
to the theatre. It was long since Alexander had thought of any of
these things, but now they came back to him quite fresh, and had a
significance they did not have when they were first told him in his
restless twenties. So she was still in the old neighborhood, near
Bedford Square. The new number probably meant increased prosperity. He
hoped so. He would like to know that she was snugly settled. He looked
at his watch. It was a quarter past ten; she would not be home for a
good two hours yet, and he might as well walk over and have a look at
the place. He remembered the shortest way.

It was a warm, smoky evening, and there was a grimy moon. He went
through Covent Garden to Oxford Street, and as he turned into Museum
Street he walked more slowly, smiling at his own nervousness as he
approached the sullen gray mass at the end. He had not been inside the
Museum, actually, since he and Hilda used to meet there; sometimes
to set out for gay adventures at Twickenham or Richmond, sometimes to
linger about the place for a while and to ponder by Lord Elgin’s marbles
upon the lastingness of some things, or, in the mummy room, upon the
awful brevity of others. Since then Bartley had always thought of the
British Museum as the ultimate repository of mortality, where all the
dead things in the world were assembled to make one’s hour of youth
the more precious. One trembled lest before he got out it might somehow
escape him, lest he might drop the glass from over-eagerness and see it
shivered on the stone floor at his feet. How one hid his youth under his
coat and hugged it! And how good it was to turn one’s back upon all that
vaulted cold, to take Hilda’s arm and hurry out of the great door and
down the steps into the sunlight among the pigeons--to know that
the warm and vital thing within him was still there and had not been
snatched away to flush Caesar’s lean cheek or to feed the veins of some
bearded Assyrian king. They in their day had carried the flaming liquor,
but to-day was his! So the song used to run in his head those summer
mornings a dozen years ago. Alexander walked by the place very quietly,
as if he were afraid of waking some one.

He crossed Bedford Square and found the number he was looking for. The
house, a comfortable, well-kept place enough, was dark except for the
four front windows on the second floor, where a low, even light was
burning behind the white muslin sash curtains. Outside there were window
boxes, painted white and full of flowers. Bartley was making a third
round of the Square when he heard the far-flung hoof-beats of a
hansom-cab horse, driven rapidly. He looked at his watch, and was
astonished to find that it was a few minutes after twelve. He turned and
walked back along the iron railing as the cab came up to Hilda’s number
and stopped. The hansom must have been one that she employed regularly,
for she did not stop to pay the driver. She stepped out quickly and
lightly. He heard her cheerful “Good-night, cabby,” as she ran up the
steps and opened the door with a latchkey. In a few moments the lights
flared up brightly behind the white curtains, and as he walked away
he heard a window raised. But he had gone too far to look up without
turning round. He went back to his hotel, feeling that he had had a good
evening, and he slept well.

For the next few days Alexander was very busy. He took a desk in the
office of a Scotch engineering firm on Henrietta Street, and was at work
almost constantly. He avoided the clubs and usually dined alone at his
hotel. One afternoon, after he had tea, he started for a walk down the
Embankment toward Westminster, intending to end his stroll at Bedford
Square and to ask whether Miss Burgoyne would let him take her to the
theatre. But he did not go so far. When he reached the Abbey, he turned
back and crossed Westminster Bridge and sat down to watch the trails of
smoke behind the Houses of Parliament catch fire with the sunset. The
slender towers were washed by a rain of golden light and licked by
little flickering flames; Somerset House and the bleached gray pinnacles
about Whitehall were floated in a luminous haze. The yellow light poured
through the trees and the leaves seemed to burn with soft fires. There
was a smell of acacias in the air everywhere, and the laburnums were
dripping gold over the walls of the gardens. It was a sweet, lonely kind
of summer evening. Remembering Hilda as she used to be, was doubtless
more satisfactory than seeing her as she must be now--and, after all,
Alexander asked himself, what was it but his own young years that he was
remembering ?

He crossed back to Westminster, went up to the Temple, and sat down to
smoke in the Middle Temple gardens, listening to the thin voice of the
fountain and smelling the spice of the sycamores that came out heavily
in the damp evening air. He thought, as he sat there, about a great many
things: about his own youth and Hilda’s; above all, he thought of how
glorious it had been, and how quickly it had passed; and, when it had
passed, how little worth while anything was. None of the things he had
gained in the least compensated. In the last six years his reputation
had become, as the saying is, popular. Four years ago he had been called
to Japan to deliver, at the Emperor’s request, a course of lectures
at the Imperial University, and had instituted reforms throughout the
islands, not only in the practice of bridge-building but in drainage and
road-making. On his return he had undertaken the bridge at Moorlock,
in Canada, the most important piece of bridge-building going on in
the world,--a test, indeed, of how far the latest practice in bridge
structure could be carried. It was a spectacular undertaking by reason
of its very size, and Bartley realized that, whatever else he might do,
he would probably always be known as the engineer who designed the great
Moorlock Bridge, the longest cantilever in existence. Yet it was to him
the least satisfactory thing he had ever done. He was cramped in every
way by a niggardly commission, and was using lighter structural material
than he thought proper. He had vexations enough, too, with his work at
home. He had several bridges under way in the United States, and they
were always being held up by strikes and delays resulting from a general
industrial unrest.

Though Alexander often told himself he had never put more into his work
than he had done in the last few years, he had to admit that he had
never got so little out of it. He was paying for success, too, in the
demands made on his time by boards of civic enterprise and committees
of public welfare. The obligations imposed by his wife’s fortune
and position were sometimes distracting to a man who followed his
profession, and he was expected to be interested in a great many worthy
endeavors on her account as well as on his own. His existence was
becoming a network of great and little details. He had expected that
success would bring him freedom and power; but it had brought only power
that was in itself another kind of restraint. He had always meant to
keep his personal liberty at all costs, as old MacKeller, his first
chief, had done, and not, like so many American engineers, to become a
part of a professional movement, a cautious board member, a Nestor de
pontibus. He happened to be engaged in work of public utility, but he
was not willing to become what is called a public man. He found himself
living exactly the kind of life he had determined to escape. What, he
asked himself, did he want with these genial honors and substantial
comforts ? Hardships and difficulties he had carried lightly; overwork
had not exhausted him; but this dead calm of middle life which
confronted him,--of that he was afraid. He was not ready for it. It was
like being buried alive. In his youth he would not have believed such a
thing possible. The one thing he had really wanted all his life was to
be free; and there was still something unconquered in him, something
besides the strong work-horse that his profession had made of him. He
felt rich to-night in the possession of that unstultified survival;
in the light of his experience, it was more precious than honors or
achievement. In all those busy, successful years there had been nothing
so good as this hour of wild light-heartedness. This feeling was the
only happiness that was real to him, and such hours were the only ones
in which he could feel his own continuous identity--feel the boy he had
been in the rough days of the old West, feel the youth who had worked
his way across the ocean on a cattle-ship and gone to study in Paris
without a dollar in his pocket. The man who sat in his offices in Boston
was only a powerful machine. Under the activities of that machine the
person who, in such moments as this, he felt to be himself, was fading
and dying. He remembered how, when he was a little boy and his father
called him in the morning, he used to leap from his bed into the full
consciousness of himself. That consciousness was Life itself. Whatever
took its place, action, reflection, the power of concentrated thought,
were only functions of a mechanism useful to society; things that could
be bought in the market. There was only one thing that had an absolute
value for each individual, and it was just that original impulse, that
internal heat, that feeling of one’s self in one’s own breast.

When Alexander walked back to his hotel, the red and green lights were
blinking along the docks on the farther shore, and the soft white stars
were shining in the wide sky above the river.

The next night, and the next, Alexander repeated this same foolish
performance. It was always Miss Burgoyne whom he started out to find,
and he got no farther than the Temple gardens and the Embankment. It
was a pleasant kind of loneliness. To a man who was so little given
to reflection, whose dreams always took the form of definite ideas,
reaching into the future, there was a seductive excitement in renewing
old experiences in imagination. He started out upon these walks half
guiltily, with a curious longing and expectancy which were wholly
gratified by solitude. Solitude, but not solitariness; for he walked
shoulder to shoulder with a shadowy companion--not little Hilda
Burgoyne, by any means, but some one vastly dearer to him than she had
ever been--his own young self, the youth who had waited for him upon the
steps of the British Museum that night, and who, though he had tried to
pass so quietly, had known him and come down and linked an arm in his.

It was not until long afterward that Alexander learned that for him this
youth was the most dangerous of companions.


One Sunday evening, at Lady Walford’s, Alexander did at last meet Hilda
Burgoyne. Mainhall had told him that she would probably be there. He
looked about for her rather nervously, and finally found her at the
farther end of the large drawing-room, the centre of a circle of men,
young and old. She was apparently telling them a story. They were
all laughing and bending toward her. When she saw Alexander, she rose
quickly and put out her hand. The other men drew back a little to let
him approach.

“Mr. Alexander! I am delighted. Have you been in London long ?”

Bartley bowed, somewhat laboriously, over her hand. “Long enough to have
seen you more than once. How fine it all is!”

She laughed as if she were pleased. “I’m glad you think so. I like it.
Won’t you join us here ?”

“Miss Burgoyne was just telling us about a donkey-boy she had in Galway
last summer,” Sir Harry Towne explained as the circle closed up again.
Lord Westmere stroked his long white mustache with his bloodless hand
and looked at Alexander blankly. Hilda was a good story-teller. She was
sitting on the edge of her chair, as if she had alighted there for a
moment only. Her primrose satin gown seemed like a soft sheath for her
slender, supple figure, and its delicate color suited her white Irish
skin and brown hair. Whatever she wore, people felt the charm of her
active, girlish body with its slender hips and quick, eager shoulders.
Alexander heard little of the story, but he watched Hilda intently. She
must certainly, he reflected, be thirty, and he was honestly delighted
to see that the years had treated her so indulgently. If her face had
changed at all, it was in a slight hardening of the mouth--still eager
enough to be very disconcerting at times, he felt--and in an added
air of self-possession and self-reliance. She carried her head, too, a
little more resolutely.

When the story was finished, Miss Burgoyne turned pointedly to
Alexander, and the other men drifted away.

“I thought I saw you in MacConnell’s box with Mainhall one evening, but
I supposed you had left town before this.”

She looked at him frankly and cordially, as if he were indeed merely an
old friend whom she was glad to meet again.

“No, I’ve been mooning about here.”

Hilda laughed gayly. “Mooning! I see you mooning! You must be the
busiest man in the world. Time and success have done well by you, you
know. You’re handsomer than ever and you’ve gained a grand manner.”

Alexander blushed and bowed. “Time and success have been good friends to
both of us. Aren’t you tremendously pleased with yourself ?”

She laughed again and shrugged her shoulders. “Oh, so-so. But I want to
hear about you. Several years ago I read such a lot in the papers about
the wonderful things you did in Japan, and how the Emperor decorated
you. What was it, Commander of the Order of the Rising Sun ? That sounds
like `The Mikado.’ And what about your new bridge--in Canada, isn’t it,
and it’s to be the longest one in the world and has some queer name I
can’t remember.”

Bartley shook his head and smiled drolly. “Since when have you
been interested in bridges ? Or have you learned to be interested in
everything ? And is that a part of success ?”

“Why, how absurd! As if I were not always interested!” Hilda exclaimed.

“Well, I think we won’t talk about bridges here, at any rate.” Bartley
looked down at the toe of her yellow slipper which was tapping the rug
impatiently under the hem of her gown. “But I wonder whether you’d think
me impertinent if I asked you to let me come to see you sometime and
tell you about them ?”

“Why should I ? Ever so many people come on Sunday afternoons.”

“I know. Mainhall offered to take me. But you must know that I’ve been
in London several times within the last few years, and you might very
well think that just now is a rather inopportune time--”

She cut him short. “Nonsense. One of the pleasantest things about
success is that it makes people want to look one up, if that’s what you
mean. I’m like every one else--more agreeable to meet when things are
going well with me. Don’t you suppose it gives me any pleasure to do
something that people like ?”

“Does it ? Oh, how fine it all is, your coming on like this! But I didn’t
want you to think it was because of that I wanted to see you.” He spoke
very seriously and looked down at the floor.

Hilda studied him in wide-eyed astonishment for a moment, and then
broke into a low, amused laugh. “My dear Mr. Alexander, you have strange
delicacies. If you please, that is exactly why you wish to see me. We
understand that, do we not ?”

Bartley looked ruffled and turned the seal ring on his little finger
about awkwardly.

Hilda leaned back in her chair, watching him indulgently out of her
shrewd eyes. “Come, don’t be angry, but don’t try to pose for me, or to
be anything but what you are. If you care to come, it’s yourself I’ll
be glad to see, and you thinking well of yourself. Don’t try to wear a
cloak of humility; it doesn’t become you. Stalk in as you are and don’t
make excuses. I’m not accustomed to inquiring into the motives of my
guests. That would hardly be safe, even for Lady Walford, in a great
house like this.”

“Sunday afternoon, then,” said Alexander, as she rose to join her
hostess. “How early may I come ?”

She gave him her hand and flushed and laughed. He bent over it a little
stiffly. She went away on Lady Walford’s arm, and as he stood watching
her yellow train glide down the long floor he looked rather sullen. He
felt that he had not come out of it very brilliantly.



CHAPTER IV


On Sunday afternoon Alexander remembered Miss Burgoyne’s invitation and
called at her apartment. He found it a delightful little place and he
met charming people there. Hilda lived alone, attended by a very pretty
and competent French servant who answered the door and brought in the
tea. Alexander arrived early, and some twenty-odd people dropped in
during the course of the afternoon. Hugh MacConnell came with his
sister, and stood about, managing his tea-cup awkwardly and watching
every one out of his deep-set, faded eyes. He seemed to have made a
resolute effort at tidiness of attire, and his sister, a robust, florid
woman with a splendid joviality about her, kept eyeing his freshly
creased clothes apprehensively. It was not very long, indeed, before his
coat hung with a discouraged sag from his gaunt shoulders and his hair
and beard were rumpled as if he had been out in a gale. His dry
humor went under a cloud of absent-minded kindliness which, Mainhall
explained, always overtook him here. He was never so witty or so sharp
here as elsewhere, and Alexander thought he behaved as if he were an
elderly relative come in to a young girl’s party.

The editor of a monthly review came with his wife, and Lady Kildare,
the Irish philanthropist, brought her young nephew, Robert Owen, who had
come up from Oxford, and who was visibly excited and gratified by his
first introduction to Miss Burgoyne. Hilda was very nice to him, and he
sat on the edge of his chair, flushed with his conversational efforts
and moving his chin about nervously over his high collar. Sarah Frost,
the novelist, came with her husband, a very genial and placid old
scholar who had become slightly deranged upon the subject of the fourth
dimension. On other matters he was perfectly rational and he was easy
and pleasing in conversation. He looked very much like Agassiz, and
his wife, in her old-fashioned black silk dress, overskirted and
tight-sleeved, reminded Alexander of the early pictures of Mrs.
Browning. Hilda seemed particularly fond of this quaint couple, and
Bartley himself was so pleased with their mild and thoughtful converse
that he took his leave when they did, and walked with them over to
Oxford Street, where they waited for their ‘bus. They asked him to come
to see them in Chelsea, and they spoke very tenderly of Hilda. “She’s a
dear, unworldly little thing,” said the philosopher absently; “more like
the stage people of my young days--folk of simple manners. There aren’t
many such left. American tours have spoiled them, I’m afraid. They have
all grown very smart. Lamb wouldn’t care a great deal about many of
them, I fancy.”

Alexander went back to Bedford Square a second Sunday afternoon. He had
a long talk with MacConnell, but he got no word with Hilda alone, and
he left in a discontented state of mind. For the rest of the week he was
nervous and unsettled, and kept rushing his work as if he were preparing
for immediate departure. On Thursday afternoon he cut short a committee
meeting, jumped into a hansom, and drove to Bedford Square. He sent up
his card, but it came back to him with a message scribbled across the
front.

     So sorry I can’t see you.  Will you come and
     dine with me Sunday evening at half-past seven ?

     H.B.

When Bartley arrived at Bedford Square on Sunday evening, Marie,
the pretty little French girl, met him at the door and conducted him
upstairs. Hilda was writing in her living-room, under the light of a
tall desk lamp. Bartley recognized the primrose satin gown she had worn
that first evening at Lady Walford’s.

“I’m so pleased that you think me worth that yellow dress, you know,” he
said, taking her hand and looking her over admiringly from the toes of
her canary slippers to her smoothly parted brown hair. “Yes, it’s very,
very pretty. Every one at Lady Walford’s was looking at it.”

Hilda curtsied. “Is that why you think it pretty ? I’ve no need for
fine clothes in Mac’s play this time, so I can afford a few duddies for
myself. It’s owing to that same chance, by the way, that I am able to
ask you to dinner. I don’t need Marie to dress me this season, so she
keeps house for me, and my little Galway girl has gone home for a visit.
I should never have asked you if Molly had been here, for I remember you
don’t like English cookery.”

Alexander walked about the room, looking at everything.

“I haven’t had a chance yet to tell you what a jolly little place I
think this is. Where did you get those etchings ? They’re quite unusual,
aren’t they ?”

“Lady Westmere sent them to me from Rome last Christmas. She is very
much interested in the American artist who did them. They are all
sketches made about the Villa d’Este, you see. He painted that group of
cypresses for the Salon, and it was bought for the Luxembourg.”

Alexander walked over to the bookcases. “It’s the air of the whole place
here that I like. You haven’t got anything that doesn’t belong. Seems to
me it looks particularly well to-night. And you have so many flowers. I
like these little yellow irises.”

“Rooms always look better by lamplight--in London, at least. Though
Marie is clean--really clean, as the French are. Why do you look at the
flowers so critically ? Marie got them all fresh in Covent Garden market
yesterday morning.”

“I’m glad,” said Alexander simply. “I can’t tell you how glad I am to
have you so pretty and comfortable here, and to hear every one saying
such nice things about you. You’ve got awfully nice friends,” he added
humbly, picking up a little jade elephant from her desk. “Those fellows
are all very loyal, even Mainhall. They don’t talk of any one else as
they do of you.”

Hilda sat down on the couch and said seriously: “I’ve a neat little sum
in the bank, too, now, and I own a mite of a hut in Galway. It’s not
worth much, but I love it. I’ve managed to save something every year,
and that with helping my three sisters now and then, and tiding poor
Cousin Mike over bad seasons. He’s that gifted, you know, but he will
drink and loses more good engagements than other fellows ever get. And
I’ve traveled a bit, too.”

Marie opened the door and smilingly announced that dinner was served.

“My dining-room,” Hilda explained, as she led the way, “is the tiniest
place you have ever seen.”

It was a tiny room, hung all round with French prints, above which ran a
shelf full of china. Hilda saw Alexander look up at it.

“It’s not particularly rare,” she said, “but some of it was my
mother’s. Heaven knows how she managed to keep it whole, through all our
wanderings, or in what baskets and bundles and theatre trunks it hasn’t
been stowed away. We always had our tea out of those blue cups when I
was a little girl, sometimes in the queerest lodgings, and sometimes on
a trunk at the theatre--queer theatres, for that matter.”

It was a wonderful little dinner. There was watercress soup, and sole,
and a delightful omelette stuffed with mushrooms and truffles, and two
small rare ducklings, and artichokes, and a dry yellow Rhone wine of
which Bartley had always been very fond. He drank it appreciatively and
remarked that there was still no other he liked so well.

“I have some champagne for you, too. I don’t drink it myself, but I like
to see it behave when it’s poured. There is nothing else that looks so
jolly.”

“Thank you. But I don’t like it so well as this.” Bartley held the
yellow wine against the light and squinted into it as he turned the
glass slowly about. “You have traveled, you say. Have you been in Paris
much these late years ?”

Hilda lowered one of the candle-shades carefully. “Oh, yes, I go over to
Paris often. There are few changes in the old Quarter. Dear old Madame
Anger is dead--but perhaps you don’t remember her ?”

“Don’t I, though! I’m so sorry to hear it. How did her son turn out ? I
remember how she saved and scraped for him, and how he always lay abed
till ten o’clock. He was the laziest fellow at the Beaux Arts; and
that’s saying a good deal.”

“Well, he is still clever and lazy. They say he is a good architect when
he will work. He’s a big, handsome creature, and he hates Americans as
much as ever. But Angel--do you remember Angel ?”

“Perfectly. Did she ever get back to Brittany and her bains de mer ?”

“Ah, no. Poor Angel! She got tired of cooking and scouring the coppers
in Madame Anger’s little kitchen, so she ran away with a soldier, and
then with another soldier. Too bad! She still lives about the Quarter,
and, though there is always a soldat, she has become a blanchisseuse de
fin. She did my blouses beautifully the last time I was there, and was
so delighted to see me again. I gave her all my old clothes, even my old
hats, though she always wears her Breton headdress. Her hair is still
like flax, and her blue eyes are just like a baby’s, and she has the
same three freckles on her little nose, and talks about going back to
her bains de mer.”

Bartley looked at Hilda across the yellow light of the candles and broke
into a low, happy laugh. “How jolly it was being young, Hilda! Do you
remember that first walk we took together in Paris ? We walked down to
the Place Saint-Michel to buy some lilacs. Do you remember how sweet
they smelled ?”

“Indeed I do. Come, we’ll have our coffee in the other room, and you can
smoke.”

Hilda rose quickly, as if she wished to change the drift of their talk,
but Bartley found it pleasant to continue it.

“What a warm, soft spring evening that was,” he went on, as they sat
down in the study with the coffee on a little table between them; “and
the sky, over the bridges, was just the color of the lilacs. We walked
on down by the river, didn’t we ?”

Hilda laughed and looked at him questioningly. He saw a gleam in her
eyes that he remembered even better than the episode he was recalling.

“I think we did,” she answered demurely. “It was on the Quai we met
that woman who was crying so bitterly. I gave her a spray of lilac,
I remember, and you gave her a franc. I was frightened at your
prodigality.”

“I expect it was the last franc I had. What a strong brown face she had,
and very tragic. She looked at us with such despair and longing, out
from under her black shawl. What she wanted from us was neither our
flowers nor our francs, but just our youth. I remember it touched me
so. I would have given her some of mine off my back, if I could. I had
enough and to spare then,” Bartley mused, and looked thoughtfully at his
cigar.

They were both remembering what the woman had said when she took the
money: “God give you a happy love!” It was not in the ingratiating
tone of the habitual beggar: it had come out of the depths of the poor
creature’s sorrow, vibrating with pity for their youth and despair
at the terribleness of human life; it had the anguish of a voice of
prophecy. Until she spoke, Bartley had not realized that he was in love.
The strange woman, and her passionate sentence that rang out so sharply,
had frightened them both. They went home sadly with the lilacs, back
to the Rue Saint-Jacques, walking very slowly, arm in arm. When they
reached the house where Hilda lodged, Bartley went across the court with
her, and up the dark old stairs to the third landing; and there he had
kissed her for the first time. He had shut his eyes to give him the
courage, he remembered, and she had trembled so--

Bartley started when Hilda rang the little bell beside her. “Dear me,
why did you do that ? I had quite forgotten--I was back there. It was
very jolly,” he murmured lazily, as Marie came in to take away the
coffee.

Hilda laughed and went over to the piano. “Well, we are neither of us
twenty now, you know. Have I told you about my new play ? Mac is writing
one; really for me this time. You see, I’m coming on.”

“I’ve seen nothing else. What kind of a part is it ? Shall you wear
yellow gowns ? I hope so.”

He was looking at her round slender figure, as she stood by the piano,
turning over a pile of music, and he felt the energy in every line of
it.

“No, it isn’t a dress-up part. He doesn’t seem to fancy me in fine
feathers. He says I ought to be minding the pigs at home, and I suppose
I ought. But he’s given me some good Irish songs. Listen.”

She sat down at the piano and sang. When she finished, Alexander shook
himself out of a reverie.

“Sing `The Harp That Once,’ Hilda. You used to sing it so well.”

“Nonsense. Of course I can’t really sing, except the way my mother
and grandmother did before me. Most actresses nowadays learn to sing
properly, so I tried a master; but he confused me, just!”

Alexander laughed. “All the same, sing it, Hilda.”

Hilda started up from the stool and moved restlessly toward the window.
“It’s really too warm in this room to sing. Don’t you feel it ?”

Alexander went over and opened the window for her. “Aren’t you afraid
to let the wind low like that on your neck ? Can’t I get a scarf or
something ?”

“Ask a theatre lady if she’s afraid of drafts!” Hilda laughed. “But
perhaps, as I’m so warm--give me your handkerchief. There, just in
front.” He slipped the corners carefully under her shoulder-straps.
“There, that will do. It looks like a bib.” She pushed his hand away
quickly and stood looking out into the deserted square. “Isn’t London a
tomb on Sunday night ?”

Alexander caught the agitation in her voice. He stood a little behind
her, and tried to steady himself as he said: “It’s soft and misty. See
how white the stars are.”

For a long time neither Hilda nor Bartley spoke. They stood close
together, looking out into the wan, watery sky, breathing always more
quickly and lightly, and it seemed as if all the clocks in the world
had stopped. Suddenly he moved the clenched hand he held behind him
and dropped it violently at his side. He felt a tremor run through the
slender yellow figure in front of him.

She caught his handkerchief from her throat and thrust it at him without
turning round. “Here, take it. You must go now, Bartley. Good-night.”

Bartley leaned over her shoulder, without touching her, and whispered in
her ear: “You are giving me a chance ?”

“Yes. Take it and go. This isn’t fair, you know. Good-night.”

Alexander unclenched the two hands at his sides. With one he threw down
the window and with the other--still standing behind her--he drew her
back against him.

She uttered a little cry, threw her arms over her head, and drew his
face down to hers. “Are you going to let me love you a little, Bartley ?”
 she whispered.



CHAPTER V


It was the afternoon of the day before Christmas. Mrs. Alexander had
been driving about all the morning, leaving presents at the houses of
her friends. She lunched alone, and as she rose from the table she spoke
to the butler: “Thomas, I am going down to the kitchen now to see Norah.
In half an hour you are to bring the greens up from the cellar and put
them in the library. Mr. Alexander will be home at three to hang them
himself. Don’t forget the stepladder, and plenty of tacks and
string. You may bring the azaleas upstairs. Take the white one to Mr.
Alexander’s study. Put the two pink ones in this room, and the red one
in the drawing-room.”

A little before three o’clock Mrs. Alexander went into the library to
see that everything was ready. She pulled the window shades high, for
the weather was dark and stormy, and there was little light, even in
the streets. A foot of snow had fallen during the morning, and the wide
space over the river was thick with flying flakes that fell and wreathed
the masses of floating ice. Winifred was standing by the window when
she heard the front door open. She hurried to the hall as Alexander came
stamping in, covered with snow. He kissed her joyfully and brushed away
the snow that fell on her hair.

“I wish I had asked you to meet me at the office and walk home with me,
Winifred. The Common is beautiful. The boys have swept the snow off the
pond and are skating furiously. Did the cyclamens come ?”

“An hour ago. What splendid ones! But aren’t you frightfully
extravagant ?”

“Not for Christmas-time. I’ll go upstairs and change my coat. I shall be
down in a moment. Tell Thomas to get everything ready.”

When Alexander reappeared, he took his wife’s arm and went with her into
the library. “When did the azaleas get here ? Thomas has got the white
one in my room.”

“I told him to put it there.”

“But, I say, it’s much the finest of the lot!”

“That’s why I had it put there. There is too much color in that room for
a red one, you know.”

Bartley began to sort the greens. “It looks very splendid there, but I
feel piggish to have it. However, we really spend more time there than
anywhere else in the house. Will you hand me the holly ?”

He climbed up the stepladder, which creaked under his weight, and
began to twist the tough stems of the holly into the frame-work of the
chandelier.

“I forgot to tell you that I had a letter from Wilson, this morning,
explaining his telegram. He is coming on because an old uncle up in
Vermont has conveniently died and left Wilson a little money--something
like ten thousand. He’s coming on to settle up the estate. Won’t it be
jolly to have him ?”

“And how fine that he’s come into a little money. I can see him posting
down State Street to the steamship offices. He will get a good many
trips out of that ten thousand. What can have detained him ? I expected
him here for luncheon.”

“Those trains from Albany are always late. He’ll be along sometime this
afternoon. And now, don’t you want to go upstairs and lie down for
an hour ? You’ve had a busy morning and I don’t want you to be tired
to-night.”

After his wife went upstairs Alexander worked energetically at the
greens for a few moments. Then, as he was cutting off a length of
string, he sighed suddenly and sat down, staring out of the window at
the snow. The animation died out of his face, but in his eyes there was
a restless light, a look of apprehension and suspense. He kept clasping
and unclasping his big hands as if he were trying to realize something.
The clock ticked through the minutes of a half-hour and the afternoon
outside began to thicken and darken turbidly. Alexander, since he first
sat down, had not changed his position. He leaned forward, his hands
between his knees, scarcely breathing, as if he were holding himself
away from his surroundings, from the room, and from the very chair in
which he sat, from everything except the wild eddies of snow above the
river on which his eyes were fixed with feverish intentness, as if he
were trying to project himself thither. When at last Lucius Wilson was
announced, Alexander sprang eagerly to his feet and hurried to meet his
old instructor.

“Hello, Wilson. What luck! Come into the library. We are to have a lot
of people to dinner to-night, and Winifred’s lying down. You will
excuse her, won’t you ? And now what about yourself ? Sit down and tell me
everything.”

“I think I’d rather move about, if you don’t mind. I’ve been sitting in
the train for a week, it seems to me.” Wilson stood before the fire with
his hands behind him and looked about the room. “You HAVE been busy.
Bartley, if I’d had my choice of all possible places in which to spend
Christmas, your house would certainly be the place I’d have chosen.
Happy people do a great deal for their friends. A house like this
throws its warmth out. I felt it distinctly as I was coming through
the Berkshires. I could scarcely believe that I was to see Mrs. Bartley
again so soon.”

“Thank you, Wilson. She’ll be as glad to see you. Shall we have tea now ?
I’ll ring for Thomas to clear away this litter. Winifred says I always
wreck the house when I try to do anything. Do you know, I am quite
tired. Looks as if I were not used to work, doesn’t it ?” Alexander
laughed and dropped into a chair. “You know, I’m sailing the day after
New Year’s.”

“Again ? Why, you’ve been over twice since I was here in the spring,
haven’t you ?”

“Oh, I was in London about ten days in the summer. Went to escape the
hot weather more than anything else. I shan’t be gone more than a month
this time. Winifred and I have been up in Canada for most of the autumn.
That Moorlock Bridge is on my back all the time. I never had so much
trouble with a job before.” Alexander moved about restlessly and fell to
poking the fire.

“Haven’t I seen in the papers that there is some trouble about a
tidewater bridge of yours in New Jersey ?”

“Oh, that doesn’t amount to anything. It’s held up by a steel strike. A
bother, of course, but the sort of thing one is always having to put up
with. But the Moorlock Bridge is a continual anxiety. You see, the truth
is, we are having to build pretty well to the strain limit up there.
They’ve crowded me too much on the cost. It’s all very well if
everything goes well, but these estimates have never been used for
anything of such length before. However, there’s nothing to be done.
They hold me to the scale I’ve used in shorter bridges. The last thing a
bridge commission cares about is the kind of bridge you build.”


When Bartley had finished dressing for dinner he went into his study,
where he found his wife arranging flowers on his writing-table.

“These pink roses just came from Mrs. Hastings,” she said, smiling, “and
I am sure she meant them for you.”

Bartley looked about with an air of satisfaction at the greens and the
wreaths in the windows. “Have you a moment, Winifred ? I have just now
been thinking that this is our twelfth Christmas. Can you realize it ?”
 He went up to the table and took her hands away from the flowers, drying
them with his pocket handkerchief. “They’ve been awfully happy ones, all
of them, haven’t they ?” He took her in his arms and bent back, lifting
her a little and giving her a long kiss. “You are happy, aren’t you
Winifred ? More than anything else in the world, I want you to be happy.
Sometimes, of late, I’ve thought you looked as if you were troubled.”

“No; it’s only when you are troubled and harassed that I feel worried,
Bartley. I wish you always seemed as you do to-night. But you don’t,
always.” She looked earnestly and inquiringly into his eyes.

Alexander took her two hands from his shoulders and swung them back and
forth in his own, laughing his big blond laugh.

“I’m growing older, my dear; that’s what you feel. Now, may I show you
something ? I meant to save them until to-morrow, but I want you to
wear them to-night.” He took a little leather box out of his pocket and
opened it. On the white velvet lay two long pendants of curiously worked
gold, set with pearls. Winifred looked from the box to Bartley and
exclaimed:--

“Where did you ever find such gold work, Bartley ?”

“It’s old Flemish. Isn’t it fine ?”

“They are the most beautiful things, dear. But, you know, I never wear
earrings.”

“Yes, yes, I know. But I want you to wear them. I have always wanted
you to. So few women can. There must be a good ear, to begin with, and
a nose”--he waved his hand--“above reproach. Most women look silly in
them. They go only with faces like yours--very, very proud, and just a
little hard.”

Winifred laughed as she went over to the mirror and fitted the delicate
springs to the lobes of her ears. “Oh, Bartley, that old foolishness
about my being hard. It really hurts my feelings. But I must go down
now. People are beginning to come.”

Bartley drew her arm about his neck and went to the door with her. “Not
hard to me, Winifred,” he whispered. “Never, never hard to me.”

Left alone, he paced up and down his study. He was at home again, among
all the dear familiar things that spoke to him of so many happy years.
His house to-night would be full of charming people, who liked and
admired him. Yet all the time, underneath his pleasure and hopefulness
and satisfaction, he was conscious of the vibration of an unnatural
excitement. Amid this light and warmth and friendliness, he sometimes
started and shuddered, as if some one had stepped on his grave.
Something had broken loose in him of which he knew nothing except
that it was sullen and powerful, and that it wrung and tortured him.
Sometimes it came upon him softly, in enervating reveries. Sometimes it
battered him like the cannon rolling in the hold of the vessel. Always,
now, it brought with it a sense of quickened life, of stimulating
danger. To-night it came upon him suddenly, as he was walking the floor,
after his wife left him. It seemed impossible; he could not believe it.
He glanced entreatingly at the door, as if to call her back. He heard
voices in the hall below, and knew that he must go down. Going over to
the window, he looked out at the lights across the river. How could this
happen here, in his own house, among the things he loved ? What was it
that reached in out of the darkness and thrilled him ? As he stood
there he had a feeling that he would never escape. He shut his eyes and
pressed his forehead against the cold window glass, breathing in the
chill that came through it. “That this,” he groaned, “that this should
have happened to ME!”


On New Year’s day a thaw set in, and during the night torrents of rain
fell. In the morning, the morning of Alexander’s departure for England,
the river was streaked with fog and the rain drove hard against the
windows of the breakfast-room. Alexander had finished his coffee and
was pacing up and down. His wife sat at the table, watching him. She was
pale and unnaturally calm. When Thomas brought the letters, Bartley sank
into his chair and ran them over rapidly.

“Here’s a note from old Wilson. He’s safe back at his grind, and says he
had a bully time. `The memory of Mrs. Bartley will make my whole winter
fragrant.’ Just like him. He will go on getting measureless satisfaction
out of you by his study fire. What a man he is for looking on at life!”
 Bartley sighed, pushed the letters back impatiently, and went over to
the window. “This is a nasty sort of day to sail. I’ve a notion to call
it off. Next week would be time enough.”

“That would only mean starting twice. It wouldn’t really help you out at
all,” Mrs. Alexander spoke soothingly. “And you’d come back late for all
your engagements.”

Bartley began jingling some loose coins in his pocket. “I wish things
would let me rest. I’m tired of work, tired of people, tired of trailing
about.” He looked out at the storm-beaten river.

Winifred came up behind him and put a hand on his shoulder. “That’s
what you always say, poor Bartley! At bottom you really like all these
things. Can’t you remember that ?”

He put his arm about her. “All the same, life runs smoothly enough with
some people, and with me it’s always a messy sort of patchwork. It’s
like the song; peace is where I am not. How can you face it all with so
much fortitude ?”

She looked at him with that clear gaze which Wilson had so much admired,
which he had felt implied such high confidence and fearless pride. “Oh,
I faced that long ago, when you were on your first bridge, up at old
Allway. I knew then that your paths were not to be paths of peace, but I
decided that I wanted to follow them.”

Bartley and his wife stood silent for a long time; the fire crackled in
the grate, the rain beat insistently upon the windows, and the sleepy
Angora looked up at them curiously.

Presently Thomas made a discreet sound at the door. “Shall Edward bring
down your trunks, sir ?”

“Yes; they are ready. Tell him not to forget the big portfolio on the
study table.”

Thomas withdrew, closing the door softly. Bartley turned away from his
wife, still holding her hand. “It never gets any easier, Winifred.”

They both started at the sound of the carriage on the pavement outside.
Alexander sat down and leaned his head on his hand. His wife bent over
him. “Courage,” she said gayly. Bartley rose and rang the bell. Thomas
brought him his hat and stick and ulster. At the sight of these, the
supercilious Angora moved restlessly, quitted her red cushion by
the fire, and came up, waving her tail in vexation at these ominous
indications of change. Alexander stooped to stroke her, and then plunged
into his coat and drew on his gloves. His wife held his stick, smiling.
Bartley smiled too, and his eyes cleared. “I’ll work like the devil,
Winifred, and be home again before you realize I’ve gone.” He kissed her
quickly several times, hurried out of the front door into the rain, and
waved to her from the carriage window as the driver was starting his
melancholy, dripping black horses. Alexander sat with his hands clenched
on his knees. As the carriage turned up the hill, he lifted one hand and
brought it down violently. “This time”--he spoke aloud and through his
set teeth--“this time I’m going to end it!”


On the afternoon of the third day out, Alexander was sitting well to the
stern, on the windward side where the chairs were few, his rugs over
him and the collar of his fur-lined coat turned up about his ears. The
weather had so far been dark and raw. For two hours he had been
watching the low, dirty sky and the beating of the heavy rain upon
the iron-colored sea. There was a long, oily swell that made exercise
laborious. The decks smelled of damp woolens, and the air was so humid
that drops of moisture kept gathering upon his hair and mustache. He
seldom moved except to brush them away. The great open spaces made
him passive and the restlessness of the water quieted him. He intended
during the voyage to decide upon a course of action, but he held all
this away from him for the present and lay in a blessed gray
oblivion. Deep down in him somewhere his resolution was weakening and
strengthening, ebbing and flowing. The thing that perturbed him went on
as steadily as his pulse, but he was almost unconscious of it. He was
submerged in the vast impersonal grayness about him, and at intervals
the sidelong roll of the boat measured off time like the ticking of a
clock. He felt released from everything that troubled and perplexed
him. It was as if he had tricked and outwitted torturing memories, had
actually managed to get on board without them. He thought of nothing at
all. If his mind now and again picked a face out of the grayness, it was
Lucius Wilson’s, or the face of an old schoolmate, forgotten for years;
or it was the slim outline of a favorite greyhound he used to hunt
jack-rabbits with when he was a boy.

Toward six o’clock the wind rose and tugged at the tarpaulin and brought
the swell higher. After dinner Alexander came back to the wet deck,
piled his damp rugs over him again, and sat smoking, losing himself in
the obliterating blackness and drowsing in the rush of the gale. Before
he went below a few bright stars were pricked off between heavily moving
masses of cloud.

The next morning was bright and mild, with a fresh breeze. Alexander
felt the need of exercise even before he came out of his cabin. When he
went on deck the sky was blue and blinding, with heavy whiffs of white
cloud, smoke-colored at the edges, moving rapidly across it. The water
was roughish, a cold, clear indigo breaking into whitecaps. Bartley
walked for two hours, and then stretched himself in the sun until
lunch-time.

In the afternoon he wrote a long letter to Winifred. Later, as he walked
the deck through a splendid golden sunset, his spirits rose continually.
It was agreeable to come to himself again after several days of numbness
and torpor. He stayed out until the last tinge of violet had faded from
the water. There was literally a taste of life on his lips as he
sat down to dinner and ordered a bottle of champagne. He was late in
finishing his dinner, and drank rather more wine than he had meant to.
When he went above, the wind had risen and the deck was almost deserted.
As he stepped out of the door a gale lifted his heavy fur coat about
his shoulders. He fought his way up the deck with keen exhilaration.
The moment he stepped, almost out of breath, behind the shelter of the
stern, the wind was cut off, and he felt, like a rush of warm air, a
sense of close and intimate companionship. He started back and tore his
coat open as if something warm were actually clinging to him beneath it.
He hurried up the deck and went into the saloon parlor, full of women
who had retreated thither from the sharp wind. He threw himself upon
them. He talked delightfully to the older ones and played accompaniments
for the younger ones until the last sleepy girl had followed her mother
below. Then he went into the smoking-room. He played bridge until two
o’clock in the morning, and managed to lose a considerable sum of money
without really noticing that he was doing so.

After the break of one fine day the weather was pretty consistently
dull. When the low sky thinned a trifle, the pale white spot of a sun
did no more than throw a bluish lustre on the water, giving it the dark
brightness of newly cut lead. Through one after another of those gray
days Alexander drowsed and mused, drinking in the grateful moisture. But
the complete peace of the first part of the voyage was over. Sometimes
he rose suddenly from his chair as if driven out, and paced the deck for
hours. People noticed his propensity for walking in rough weather, and
watched him curiously as he did his rounds. From his abstraction and the
determined set of his jaw, they fancied he must be thinking about his
bridge. Every one had heard of the new cantilever bridge in Canada.

But Alexander was not thinking about his work. After the fourth night
out, when his will suddenly softened under his hands, he had been
continually hammering away at himself. More and more often, when he
first wakened in the morning or when he stepped into a warm place after
being chilled on the deck, he felt a sudden painful delight at being
nearer another shore. Sometimes when he was most despondent, when he
thought himself worn out with this struggle, in a flash he was free
of it and leaped into an overwhelming consciousness of himself. On the
instant he felt that marvelous return of the impetuousness, the intense
excitement, the increasing expectancy of youth.



CHAPTER VI


The last two days of the voyage Bartley found almost intolerable. The
stop at Queenstown, the tedious passage up the Mersey, were things that
he noted dimly through his growing impatience. He had planned to stop in
Liverpool; but, instead, he took the boat train for London.

Emerging at Euston at half-past three o’clock in the afternoon,
Alexander had his luggage sent to the Savoy and drove at once to Bedford
Square. When Marie met him at the door, even her strong sense of the
proprieties could not restrain her surprise and delight. She blushed and
smiled and fumbled his card in her confusion before she ran upstairs.
Alexander paced up and down the hallway, buttoning and unbuttoning his
overcoat, until she returned and took him up to Hilda’s living-room. The
room was empty when he entered. A coal fire was crackling in the grate
and the lamps were lit, for it was already beginning to grow dark
outside. Alexander did not sit down. He stood his ground over by the
windows until Hilda came in. She called his name on the threshold, but
in her swift flight across the room she felt a change in him and caught
herself up so deftly that he could not tell just when she did it.
She merely brushed his cheek with her lips and put a hand lightly and
joyously on either shoulder. “Oh, what a grand thing to happen on a
raw day! I felt it in my bones when I woke this morning that something
splendid was going to turn up. I thought it might be Sister Kate or
Cousin Mike would be happening along. I never dreamed it would be you,
Bartley. But why do you let me chatter on like this ? Come over to the
fire; you’re chilled through.”

She pushed him toward the big chair by the fire, and sat down on a stool
at the opposite side of the hearth, her knees drawn up to her chin,
laughing like a happy little girl.

“When did you come, Bartley, and how did it happen ? You haven’t spoken a
word.”

“I got in about ten minutes ago. I landed at Liverpool this morning and
came down on the boat train.”

Alexander leaned forward and warmed his hands before the blaze. Hilda
watched him with perplexity.

“There’s something troubling you, Bartley. What is it ?”

Bartley bent lower over the fire. “It’s the whole thing that troubles
me, Hilda. You and I.”

Hilda took a quick, soft breath. She looked at his heavy shoulders and
big, determined head, thrust forward like a catapult in leash.

“What about us, Bartley ?” she asked in a thin voice.

He locked and unlocked his hands over the grate and spread his fingers
close to the bluish flame, while the coals crackled and the clock ticked
and a street vendor began to call under the window. At last Alexander
brought out one word:--

“Everything!”

Hilda was pale by this time, and her eyes were wide with fright. She
looked about desperately from Bartley to the door, then to the windows,
and back again to Bartley. She rose uncertainly, touched his hair with
her hand, then sank back upon her stool.

“I’ll do anything you wish me to, Bartley,” she said tremulously. “I
can’t stand seeing you miserable.”

“I can’t live with myself any longer,” he answered roughly.

He rose and pushed the chair behind him and began to walk miserably
about the room, seeming to find it too small for him. He pulled up a
window as if the air were heavy.

Hilda watched him from her corner, trembling and scarcely breathing,
dark shadows growing about her eyes.

“It . . . it hasn’t always made you miserable, has it ?” Her eyelids fell
and her lips quivered.

“Always. But it’s worse now. It’s unbearable. It tortures me every
minute.”

“But why NOW ?” she asked piteously, wringing her hands.

He ignored her question. “I am not a man who can live two lives,” he
went on feverishly. “Each life spoils the other. I get nothing but
misery out of either. The world is all there, just as it used to be,
but I can’t get at it any more. There is this deception between me and
everything.”

At that word “deception,” spoken with such self-contempt, the color
flashed back into Hilda’s face as suddenly as if she had been struck
by a whiplash. She bit her lip and looked down at her hands, which were
clasped tightly in front of her.

“Could you--could you sit down and talk about it quietly, Bartley, as if
I were a friend, and not some one who had to be defied ?”

He dropped back heavily into his chair by the fire. “It was myself I was
defying, Hilda. I have thought about it until I am worn out.”

He looked at her and his haggard face softened. He put out his hand
toward her as he looked away again into the fire.

She crept across to him, drawing her stool after her. “When did you
first begin to feel like this, Bartley ?”

“After the very first. The first was--sort of in play, wasn’t it ?”

Hilda’s face quivered, but she whispered: “Yes, I think it must have
been. But why didn’t you tell me when you were here in the summer ?”

Alexander groaned. “I meant to, but somehow I couldn’t. We had only a
few days, and your new play was just on, and you were so happy.”

“Yes, I was happy, wasn’t I ?” She pressed his hand gently in gratitude.
“Weren’t you happy then, at all ?”

She closed her eyes and took a deep breath, as if to draw in again the
fragrance of those days. Something of their troubling sweetness came
back to Alexander, too. He moved uneasily and his chair creaked.

“Yes, I was then. You know. But afterward. . .”

“Yes, yes,” she hurried, pulling her hand gently away from him.
Presently it stole back to his coat sleeve. “Please tell me one thing,
Bartley. At least, tell me that you believe I thought I was making you
happy.”

His hand shut down quickly over the questioning fingers on his sleeves.
“Yes, Hilda; I know that,” he said simply.

She leaned her head against his arm and spoke softly:--

“You see, my mistake was in wanting you to have everything. I wanted you
to eat all the cakes and have them, too. I somehow believed that I could
take all the bad consequences for you. I wanted you always to be happy
and handsome and successful--to have all the things that a great man
ought to have, and, once in a way, the careless holidays that great men
are not permitted.”

Bartley gave a bitter little laugh, and Hilda looked up and read in the
deepening lines of his face that youth and Bartley would not much longer
struggle together.

“I understand, Bartley. I was wrong. But I didn’t know. You’ve only to
tell me now. What must I do that I’ve not done, or what must I not do ?”
 She listened intently, but she heard nothing but the creaking of his
chair. “You want me to say it ?” she whispered. “You want to tell me that
you can only see me like this, as old friends do, or out in the world
among people ? I can do that.”

“I can’t,” he said heavily.

Hilda shivered and sat still. Bartley leaned his head in his hands and
spoke through his teeth. “It’s got to be a clean break, Hilda. I can’t
see you at all, anywhere. What I mean is that I want you to promise
never to see me again, no matter how often I come, no matter how hard I
beg.”

Hilda sprang up like a flame. She stood over him with her hands clenched
at her side, her body rigid.

“No!” she gasped. “It’s too late to ask that. Do you hear me, Bartley ?
It’s too late. I won’t promise. It’s abominable of you to ask me. Keep
away if you wish; when have I ever followed you ? But, if you come to me,
I’ll do as I see fit. The shamefulness of your asking me to do that! If
you come to me, I’ll do as I see fit. Do you understand ? Bartley, you’re
cowardly!”

Alexander rose and shook himself angrily. “Yes, I know I’m cowardly.
I’m afraid of myself. I don’t trust myself any more. I carried it all
lightly enough at first, but now I don’t dare trifle with it. It’s
getting the better of me. It’s different now. I’m growing older, and
you’ve got my young self here with you. It’s through him that I’ve come
to wish for you all and all the time.” He took her roughly in his arms.
“Do you know what I mean ?”

Hilda held her face back from him and began to cry bitterly. “Oh,
Bartley, what am I to do ? Why didn’t you let me be angry with you ? You
ask me to stay away from you because you want me! And I’ve got nobody
but you. I will do anything you say--but that! I will ask the least
imaginable, but I must have SOMETHING!”

Bartley turned away and sank down in his chair again. Hilda sat on the
arm of it and put her hands lightly on his shoulders.

“Just something Bartley. I must have you to think of through the months
and months of loneliness. I must see you. I must know about you. The
sight of you, Bartley, to see you living and happy and successful--can
I never make you understand what that means to me ?” She pressed his
shoulders gently. “You see, loving some one as I love you makes the
whole world different. If I’d met you later, if I hadn’t loved you so
well--but that’s all over, long ago. Then came all those years without
you, lonely and hurt and discouraged; those decent young fellows and
poor Mac, and me never heeding--hard as a steel spring. And then you
came back, not caring very much, but it made no difference.”

She slid to the floor beside him, as if she were too tired to sit up any
longer. Bartley bent over and took her in his arms, kissing her mouth
and her wet, tired eyes.

“Don’t cry, don’t cry,” he whispered. “We’ve tortured each other enough
for tonight. Forget everything except that I am here.”

“I think I have forgotten everything but that already,” she murmured.
“Ah, your dear arms!”



CHAPTER VII


During the fortnight that Alexander was in London he drove himself hard.
He got through a great deal of personal business and saw a great many
men who were doing interesting things in his own profession. He disliked
to think of his visits to London as holidays, and when he was there he
worked even harder than he did at home.

The day before his departure for Liverpool was a singularly fine one.
The thick air had cleared overnight in a strong wind which brought in a
golden dawn and then fell off to a fresh breeze. When Bartley looked
out of his windows from the Savoy, the river was flashing silver and the
gray stone along the Embankment was bathed in bright, clear sunshine.
London had wakened to life after three weeks of cold and sodden rain.
Bartley breakfasted hurriedly and went over his mail while the hotel
valet packed his trunks. Then he paid his account and walked rapidly
down the Strand past Charing Cross Station. His spirits rose with every
step, and when he reached Trafalgar Square, blazing in the sun, with
its fountains playing and its column reaching up into the bright air,
he signaled to a hansom, and, before he knew what he was about, told the
driver to go to Bedford Square by way of the British Museum.

When he reached Hilda’s apartment she met him, fresh as the morning
itself. Her rooms were flooded with sunshine and full of the flowers he
had been sending her. She would never let him give her anything else.

“Are you busy this morning, Hilda ?” he asked as he sat down, his hat and
gloves in his hand.

“Very. I’ve been up and about three hours, working at my part. We open
in February, you know.”

“Well, then you’ve worked enough. And so have I. I’ve seen all my men,
my packing is done, and I go up to Liverpool this evening. But this
morning we are going to have a holiday. What do you say to a drive out
to Kew and Richmond ? You may not get another day like this all winter.
It’s like a fine April day at home. May I use your telephone ? I want to
order the carriage.”

“Oh, how jolly! There, sit down at the desk. And while you are
telephoning I’ll change my dress. I shan’t be long. All the morning
papers are on the table.”

Hilda was back in a few moments wearing a long gray squirrel coat and a
broad fur hat.

Bartley rose and inspected her. “Why don’t you wear some of those pink
roses ?” he asked.

“But they came only this morning, and they have not even begun to open.
I was saving them. I am so unconsciously thrifty!” She laughed as she
looked about the room. “You’ve been sending me far too many flowers,
Bartley. New ones every day. That’s too often; though I do love to open
the boxes, and I take good care of them.”

“Why won’t you let me send you any of those jade or ivory things you are
so fond of ? Or pictures ? I know a good deal about pictures.”

Hilda shook her large hat as she drew the roses out of the tall glass.
“No, there are some things you can’t do. There’s the carriage. Will you
button my gloves for me ?”

Bartley took her wrist and began to button the long gray suede glove.
“How gay your eyes are this morning, Hilda.”

“That’s because I’ve been studying. It always stirs me up a little.”

He pushed the top of the glove up slowly. “When did you learn to take
hold of your parts like that ?”

“When I had nothing else to think of. Come, the carriage is waiting.
What a shocking while you take.”

“I’m in no hurry. We’ve plenty of time.”

They found all London abroad. Piccadilly was a stream of rapidly
moving carriages, from which flashed furs and flowers and bright winter
costumes. The metal trappings of the harnesses shone dazzlingly, and the
wheels were revolving disks that threw off rays of light. The parks were
full of children and nursemaids and joyful dogs that leaped and yelped
and scratched up the brown earth with their paws.

“I’m not going until to-morrow, you know,” Bartley announced suddenly.
“I’ll cut off a day in Liverpool. I haven’t felt so jolly this long
while.”

Hilda looked up with a smile which she tried not to make too glad. “I
think people were meant to be happy, a little,” she said.

They had lunch at Richmond and then walked to Twickenham, where they had
sent the carriage. They drove back, with a glorious sunset behind them,
toward the distant gold-washed city. It was one of those rare afternoons
when all the thickness and shadow of London are changed to a kind of
shining, pulsing, special atmosphere; when the smoky vapors become
fluttering golden clouds, nacreous veils of pink and amber; when all
that bleakness of gray stone and dullness of dirty brick trembles in
aureate light, and all the roofs and spires, and one great dome, are
floated in golden haze. On such rare afternoons the ugliest of cities
becomes the most poetic, and months of sodden days are offset by a
moment of miracle.

“It’s like that with us Londoners, too,” Hilda was saying. “Everything
is awfully grim and cheerless, our weather and our houses and our ways
of amusing ourselves. But we can be happier than anybody. We can go mad
with joy, as the people do out in the fields on a fine Whitsunday. We
make the most of our moment.”

She thrust her little chin out defiantly over her gray fur collar, and
Bartley looked down at her and laughed.

“You are a plucky one, you.” He patted her glove with his hand. “Yes,
you are a plucky one.”

Hilda sighed. “No, I’m not. Not about some things, at any rate. It
doesn’t take pluck to fight for one’s moment, but it takes pluck to go
without--a lot. More than I have. I can’t help it,” she added fiercely.

After miles of outlying streets and little gloomy houses, they reached
London itself, red and roaring and murky, with a thick dampness coming
up from the river, that betokened fog again to-morrow. The streets were
full of people who had worked indoors all through the priceless day and
had now come hungrily out to drink the muddy lees of it. They stood
in long black lines, waiting before the pit entrances of the
theatres--short-coated boys, and girls in sailor hats, all shivering
and chatting gayly. There was a blurred rhythm in all the dull city
noises--in the clatter of the cab horses and the rumbling of the busses,
in the street calls, and in the undulating tramp, tramp of the crowd. It
was like the deep vibration of some vast underground machinery, and like
the muffled pulsations of millions of human hearts.

[See “The Barrel Organ by Alfred Noyes. Ed.] [I have placed it at the
end for your convenience]

“Seems good to get back, doesn’t it ?” Bartley whispered, as they drove
from Bayswater Road into Oxford Street. “London always makes me want to
live more than any other city in the world. You remember our priestess
mummy over in the mummy-room, and how we used to long to go and bring
her out on nights like this ? Three thousand years! Ugh!”

“All the same, I believe she used to feel it when we stood there and
watched her and wished her well. I believe she used to remember,” Hilda
said thoughtfully.

“I hope so. Now let’s go to some awfully jolly place for dinner before
we go home. I could eat all the dinners there are in London to-night.
Where shall I tell the driver ? The Piccadilly Restaurant ? The music’s
good there.”

“There are too many people there whom one knows. Why not that little
French place in Soho, where we went so often when you were here in
the summer ? I love it, and I’ve never been there with any one but you.
Sometimes I go by myself, when I am particularly lonely.”

“Very well, the sole’s good there. How many street pianos there are
about to-night! The fine weather must have thawed them out. We’ve had
five miles of `Il Trovatore’ now. They always make me feel jaunty. Are
you comfy, and not too tired ?”

“I’m not tired at all. I was just wondering how people can ever die.
Why did you remind me of the mummy ? Life seems the strongest and most
indestructible thing in the world. Do you really believe that all those
people rushing about down there, going to good dinners and clubs and
theatres, will be dead some day, and not care about anything ? I don’t
believe it, and I know I shan’t die, ever! You see, I feel too--too
powerful!”

The carriage stopped. Bartley sprang out and swung her quickly to
the pavement. As he lifted her in his two hands he whispered: “You
are--powerful!”



CHAPTER VIII


The last rehearsal was over, a tedious dress rehearsal which had lasted
all day and exhausted the patience of every one who had to do with it.
When Hilda had dressed for the street and came out of her dressing-room,
she found Hugh MacConnell waiting for her in the corridor.

“The fog’s thicker than ever, Hilda. There have been a great many
accidents to-day. It’s positively unsafe for you to be out alone. Will
you let me take you home ?”

“How good of you, Mac. If you are going with me, I think I’d rather
walk. I’ve had no exercise to-day, and all this has made me nervous.”

“I shouldn’t wonder,” said MacConnell dryly. Hilda pulled down her
veil and they stepped out into the thick brown wash that submerged St.
Martin’s Lane. MacConnell took her hand and tucked it snugly under his
arm. “I’m sorry I was such a savage. I hope you didn’t think I made an
ass of myself.”

“Not a bit of it. I don’t wonder you were peppery. Those things are
awfully trying. How do you think it’s going ?”

“Magnificently. That’s why I got so stirred up. We are going to hear
from this, both of us. And that reminds me; I’ve got news for you. They
are going to begin repairs on the theatre about the middle of March, and
we are to run over to New York for six weeks. Bennett told me yesterday
that it was decided.”

Hilda looked up delightedly at the tall gray figure beside her. He
was the only thing she could see, for they were moving through a dense
opaqueness, as if they were walking at the bottom of the ocean.

“Oh, Mac, how glad I am! And they love your things over there, don’t
they ?”

“Shall you be glad for--any other reason, Hilda ?”

MacConnell put his hand in front of her to ward off some dark object. It
proved to be only a lamp-post, and they beat in farther from the edge of
the pavement.

“What do you mean, Mac ?” Hilda asked nervously.

“I was just thinking there might be people over there you’d be glad to
see,” he brought out awkwardly. Hilda said nothing, and as they walked
on MacConnell spoke again, apologetically: “I hope you don’t mind my
knowing about it, Hilda. Don’t stiffen up like that. No one else knows,
and I didn’t try to find out anything. I felt it, even before I knew who
he was. I knew there was somebody, and that it wasn’t I.”

They crossed Oxford Street in silence, feeling their way. The busses had
stopped running and the cab-drivers were leading their horses. When
they reached the other side, MacConnell said suddenly, “I hope you are
happy.”

“Terribly, dangerously happy, Mac,”--Hilda spoke quietly, pressing the
rough sleeve of his greatcoat with her gloved hand.

“You’ve always thought me too old for you, Hilda,--oh, of course you’ve
never said just that,--and here this fellow is not more than eight years
younger than I. I’ve always felt that if I could get out of my old case
I might win you yet. It’s a fine, brave youth I carry inside me, only
he’ll never be seen.”

“Nonsense, Mac. That has nothing to do with it. It’s because you seem
too close to me, too much my own kind. It would be like marrying Cousin
Mike, almost. I really tried to care as you wanted me to, away back in
the beginning.”

“Well, here we are, turning out of the Square. You are not angry with
me, Hilda ? Thank you for this walk, my dear. Go in and get dry things on
at once. You’ll be having a great night to-morrow.”

She put out her hand. “Thank you, Mac, for everything. Good-night.”

MacConnell trudged off through the fog, and she went slowly upstairs.
Her slippers and dressing gown were waiting for her before the fire. “I
shall certainly see him in New York. He will see by the papers that we
are coming. Perhaps he knows it already,” Hilda kept thinking as she
undressed. “Perhaps he will be at the dock. No, scarcely that; but I may
meet him in the street even before he comes to see me.” Marie placed
the tea-table by the fire and brought Hilda her letters. She looked them
over, and started as she came to one in a handwriting that she did not
often see; Alexander had written to her only twice before, and he did
not allow her to write to him at all. “Thank you, Marie. You may go
now.”


Hilda sat down by the table with the letter in her hand, still unopened.
She looked at it intently, turned it over, and felt its thickness with
her fingers. She believed that she sometimes had a kind of second-sight
about letters, and could tell before she read them whether they brought
good or evil tidings. She put this one down on the table in front of her
while she poured her tea. At last, with a little shiver of expectancy,
she tore open the envelope and read:--


Boston, February --

MY DEAR HILDA:--

It is after twelve o’clock. Every one else is in bed and I am sitting
alone in my study. I have been happier in this room than anywhere else
in the world. Happiness like that makes one insolent. I used to think
these four walls could stand against anything. And now I scarcely know
myself here. Now I know that no one can build his security upon the
nobleness of another person. Two people, when they love each other,
grow alike in their tastes and habits and pride, but their moral natures
(whatever we may mean by that canting expression) are never welded. The
base one goes on being base, and the noble one noble, to the end.

The last week has been a bad one; I have been realizing how things used
to be with me. Sometimes I get used to being dead inside, but lately it
has been as if a window beside me had suddenly opened, and as if all the
smells of spring blew in to me. There is a garden out there, with stars
overhead, where I used to walk at night when I had a single purpose and
a single heart. I can remember how I used to feel there, how beautiful
everything about me was, and what life and power and freedom I felt in
myself. When the window opens I know exactly how it would feel to be out
there. But that garden is closed to me. How is it, I ask myself, that
everything can be so different with me when nothing here has changed ?
I am in my own house, in my own study, in the midst of all these quiet
streets where my friends live. They are all safe and at peace with
themselves. But I am never at peace. I feel always on the edge of danger
and change.

I keep remembering locoed horses I used to see on the range when I was
a boy. They changed like that. We used to catch them and put them up in
the corral, and they developed great cunning. They would pretend to eat
their oats like the other horses, but we knew they were always scheming
to get back at the loco.

It seems that a man is meant to live only one life in this world. When
he tries to live a second, he develops another nature. I feel as if
a second man had been grafted into me. At first he seemed only a
pleasure-loving simpleton, of whose company I was rather ashamed, and
whom I used to hide under my coat when I walked the Embankment, in
London. But now he is strong and sullen, and he is fighting for his
life at the cost of mine. That is his one activity: to grow strong. No
creature ever wanted so much to live. Eventually, I suppose, he will
absorb me altogether. Believe me, you will hate me then.

And what have you to do, Hilda, with this ugly story ? Nothing at all.
The little boy drank of the prettiest brook in the forest and he became
a stag. I write all this because I can never tell it to you, and because
it seems as if I could not keep silent any longer. And because I suffer,
Hilda. If any one I loved suffered like this, I’d want to know it. Help
me, Hilda!

B.A.



CHAPTER IX


On the last Saturday in April, the New York “Times” published an account
of the strike complications which were delaying Alexander’s New Jersey
bridge, and stated that the engineer himself was in town and at his
office on West Tenth Street.

On Sunday, the day after this notice appeared, Alexander worked all day
at his Tenth Street rooms. His business often called him to New York,
and he had kept an apartment there for years, subletting it when he went
abroad for any length of time. Besides his sleeping-room and bath, there
was a large room, formerly a painter’s studio, which he used as a
study and office. It was furnished with the cast-off possessions of his
bachelor days and with odd things which he sheltered for friends of
his who followed itinerant and more or less artistic callings. Over the
fireplace there was a large old-fashioned gilt mirror. Alexander’s big
work-table stood in front of one of the three windows, and above the
couch hung the one picture in the room, a big canvas of charming color
and spirit, a study of the Luxembourg Gardens in early spring, painted
in his youth by a man who had since become a portrait-painter of
international renown. He had done it for Alexander when they were
students together in Paris.


Sunday was a cold, raw day and a fine rain fell continuously. When
Alexander came back from dinner he put more wood on his fire, made
himself comfortable, and settled down at his desk, where he began
checking over estimate sheets. It was after nine o’clock and he was
lighting a second pipe, when he thought he heard a sound at his door.
He started and listened, holding the burning match in his hand; again
he heard the same sound, like a firm, light tap. He rose and crossed the
room quickly. When he threw open the door he recognized the figure that
shrank back into the bare, dimly lit hallway. He stood for a moment in
awkward constraint, his pipe in his hand.

“Come in,” he said to Hilda at last, and closed the door behind her. He
pointed to a chair by the fire and went back to his worktable. “Won’t
you sit down ?”

He was standing behind the table, turning over a pile of blueprints
nervously. The yellow light from the student’s lamp fell on his hands
and the purple sleeves of his velvet smoking-jacket, but his flushed
face and big, hard head were in the shadow. There was something about
him that made Hilda wish herself at her hotel again, in the street
below, anywhere but where she was.

“Of course I know, Bartley,” she said at last, “that after this you
won’t owe me the least consideration. But we sail on Tuesday. I saw that
interview in the paper yesterday, telling where you were, and I thought
I had to see you. That’s all. Good-night; I’m going now.” She turned and
her hand closed on the door-knob.

Alexander hurried toward her and took her gently by the arm. “Sit down,
Hilda; you’re wet through. Let me take off your coat--and your boots;
they’re oozing water.” He knelt down and began to unlace her shoes,
while Hilda shrank into the chair. “Here, put your feet on this stool.
You don’t mean to say you walked down--and without overshoes!”

Hilda hid her face in her hands. “I was afraid to take a cab. Can’t you
see, Bartley, that I’m terribly frightened ? I’ve been through this a
hundred times to-day. Don’t be any more angry than you can help. I was
all right until I knew you were in town. If you’d sent me a note, or
telephoned me, or anything! But you won’t let me write to you, and I had
to see you after that letter, that terrible letter you wrote me when you
got home.”

Alexander faced her, resting his arm on the mantel behind him, and began
to brush the sleeve of his jacket. “Is this the way you mean to answer
it, Hilda ?” he asked unsteadily.

She was afraid to look up at him. “Didn’t--didn’t you mean even to say
goodby to me, Bartley ? Did you mean just to--quit me ?” she asked. “I
came to tell you that I’m willing to do as you asked me. But it’s no use
talking about that now. Give me my things, please.” She put her hand out
toward the fender.

Alexander sat down on the arm of her chair. “Did you think I had
forgotten you were in town, Hilda ? Do you think I kept away by accident ?
Did you suppose I didn’t know you were sailing on Tuesday ? There is a
letter for you there, in my desk drawer. It was to have reached you on
the steamer. I was all the morning writing it. I told myself that if I
were really thinking of you, and not of myself, a letter would be better
than nothing. Marks on paper mean something to you.” He paused. “They
never did to me.”

Hilda smiled up at him beautifully and put her hand on his sleeve. “Oh,
Bartley! Did you write to me ? Why didn’t you telephone me to let me know
that you had ? Then I wouldn’t have come.”

Alexander slipped his arm about her. “I didn’t know it before, Hilda,
on my honor I didn’t, but I believe it was because, deep down in me
somewhere, I was hoping I might drive you to do just this. I’ve watched
that door all day. I’ve jumped up if the fire crackled. I think I have
felt that you were coming.” He bent his face over her hair.

“And I,” she whispered,--“I felt that you were feeling that. But when I
came, I thought I had been mistaken.”

Alexander started up and began to walk up and down the room.

“No, you weren’t mistaken. I’ve been up in Canada with my bridge, and
I arranged not to come to New York until after you had gone. Then, when
your manager added two more weeks, I was already committed.” He dropped
upon the stool in front of her and sat with his hands hanging between
his knees. “What am I to do, Hilda ?”

“That’s what I wanted to see you about, Bartley. I’m going to do
what you asked me to do when you were in London. Only I’ll do it more
completely. I’m going to marry.”

“Who ?”

“Oh, it doesn’t matter much! One of them. Only not Mac. I’m too fond of
him.”

Alexander moved restlessly. “Are you joking, Hilda ?”

“Indeed I’m not.”

“Then you don’t know what you’re talking about.”

“Yes, I know very well. I’ve thought about it a great deal, and I’ve
quite decided. I never used to understand how women did things like
that, but I know now. It’s because they can’t be at the mercy of the man
they love any longer.”

Alexander flushed angrily. “So it’s better to be at the mercy of a man
you don’t love ?”

“Under such circumstances, infinitely!”

There was a flash in her eyes that made Alexander’s fall. He got up and
went over to the window, threw it open, and leaned out. He heard Hilda
moving about behind him. When he looked over his shoulder she was lacing
her boots. He went back and stood over her.

“Hilda you’d better think a while longer before you do that. I don’t
know what I ought to say, but I don’t believe you’d be happy; truly I
don’t. Aren’t you trying to frighten me ?”

She tied the knot of the last lacing and put her boot-heel down firmly.
“No; I’m telling you what I’ve made up my mind to do. I suppose I
would better do it without telling you. But afterward I shan’t have an
opportunity to explain, for I shan’t be seeing you again.”

Alexander started to speak, but caught himself. When Hilda rose he sat
down on the arm of her chair and drew her back into it.

“I wouldn’t be so much alarmed if I didn’t know how utterly reckless
you CAN be. Don’t do anything like that rashly.” His face grew troubled.
“You wouldn’t be happy. You are not that kind of woman. I’d never have
another hour’s peace if I helped to make you do a thing like that.” He
took her face between his hands and looked down into it. “You see, you
are different, Hilda. Don’t you know you are ?” His voice grew softer,
his touch more and more tender. “Some women can do that sort of thing,
but you--you can love as queens did, in the old time.”

Hilda had heard that soft, deep tone in his voice only once before. She
closed her eyes; her lips and eyelids trembled. “Only one, Bartley. Only
one. And he threw it back at me a second time.”

She felt the strength leap in the arms that held her so lightly.

“Try him again, Hilda. Try him once again.”

She looked up into his eyes, and hid her face in her hands.



CHAPTER X


On Tuesday afternoon a Boston lawyer, who had been trying a case in
Vermont, was standing on the siding at White River Junction when the
Canadian Express pulled by on its northward journey. As the day-coaches
at the rear end of the long train swept by him, the lawyer noticed at
one of the windows a man’s head, with thick rumpled hair. “Curious,” he
thought; “that looked like Alexander, but what would he be doing back
there in the daycoaches ?”

It was, indeed, Alexander.

That morning a telegram from Moorlock had reached him, telling him that
there was serious trouble with the bridge and that he was needed there
at once, so he had caught the first train out of New York. He had taken
a seat in a day-coach to avoid the risk of meeting any one he knew, and
because he did not wish to be comfortable. When the telegram arrived,
Alexander was at his rooms on Tenth Street, packing his bag to go to
Boston. On Monday night he had written a long letter to his wife, but
when morning came he was afraid to send it, and the letter was still in
his pocket. Winifred was not a woman who could bear disappointment. She
demanded a great deal of herself and of the people she loved; and
she never failed herself. If he told her now, he knew, it would be
irretrievable. There would be no going back. He would lose the thing
he valued most in the world; he would be destroying himself and his own
happiness. There would be nothing for him afterward. He seemed to see
himself dragging out a restless existence on the Continent--Cannes,
Hyeres, Algiers, Cairo--among smartly dressed, disabled men of every
nationality; forever going on journeys that led nowhere; hurrying to
catch trains that he might just as well miss; getting up in the morning
with a great bustle and splashing of water, to begin a day that had no
purpose and no meaning; dining late to shorten the night, sleeping late
to shorten the day.

And for what ? For a mere folly, a masquerade, a little thing that he
could not let go. AND HE COULD EVEN LET IT GO, he told himself. But he
had promised to be in London at mid-summer, and he knew that he would
go. . . . It was impossible to live like this any longer.

And this, then, was to be the disaster that his old professor had
foreseen for him: the crack in the wall, the crash, the cloud of dust.
And he could not understand how it had come about. He felt that he
himself was unchanged, that he was still there, the same man he had been
five years ago, and that he was sitting stupidly by and letting some
resolute offshoot of himself spoil his life for him. This new force was
not he, it was but a part of him. He would not even admit that it was
stronger than he; but it was more active. It was by its energy that this
new feeling got the better of him. His wife was the woman who had made
his life, gratified his pride, given direction to his tastes and habits.
The life they led together seemed to him beautiful. Winifred still was,
as she had always been, Romance for him, and whenever he was deeply
stirred he turned to her. When the grandeur and beauty of the world
challenged him--as it challenges even the most self-absorbed people--he
always answered with her name. That was his reply to the question put
by the mountains and the stars; to all the spiritual aspects of life.
In his feeling for his wife there was all the tenderness, all the pride,
all the devotion of which he was capable. There was everything but
energy; the energy of youth which must register itself and cut its name
before it passes. This new feeling was so fresh, so unsatisfied and
light of foot. It ran and was not wearied, anticipated him everywhere.
It put a girdle round the earth while he was going from New York to
Moorlock. At this moment, it was tingling through him, exultant, and
live as quicksilver, whispering, “In July you will be in England.”

Already he dreaded the long, empty days at sea, the monotonous Irish
coast, the sluggish passage up the Mersey, the flash of the boat train
through the summer country. He closed his eyes and gave himself up to
the feeling of rapid motion and to swift, terrifying thoughts. He was
sitting so, his face shaded by his hand, when the Boston lawyer saw him
from the siding at White River Junction.

When at last Alexander roused himself, the afternoon had waned to
sunset. The train was passing through a gray country and the sky
overhead was flushed with a wide flood of clear color. There was a
rose-colored light over the gray rocks and hills and meadows. Off to the
left, under the approach of a weather-stained wooden bridge, a group of
boys were sitting around a little fire. The smell of the wood smoke blew
in at the window. Except for an old farmer, jogging along the highroad
in his box-wagon, there was not another living creature to be seen.
Alexander looked back wistfully at the boys, camped on the edge of a
little marsh, crouching under their shelter and looking gravely at their
fire. They took his mind back a long way, to a campfire on a sandbar in
a Western river, and he wished he could go back and sit down with them.
He could remember exactly how the world had looked then.

It was quite dark and Alexander was still thinking of the boys, when it
occurred to him that the train must be nearing Allway. In going to his
new bridge at Moorlock he had always to pass through Allway. The train
stopped at Allway Mills, then wound two miles up the river, and then the
hollow sound under his feet told Bartley that he was on his first bridge
again. The bridge seemed longer than it had ever seemed before, and he
was glad when he felt the beat of the wheels on the solid roadbed again.
He did not like coming and going across that bridge, or remembering the
man who built it. And was he, indeed, the same man who used to walk that
bridge at night, promising such things to himself and to the stars ? And
yet, he could remember it all so well: the quiet hills sleeping in the
moonlight, the slender skeleton of the bridge reaching out into the
river, and up yonder, alone on the hill, the big white house; upstairs,
in Winifred’s window, the light that told him she was still awake and
still thinking of him. And after the light went out he walked alone,
taking the heavens into his confidence, unable to tear himself away from
the white magic of the night, unwilling to sleep because longing was so
sweet to him, and because, for the first time since first the hills were
hung with moonlight, there was a lover in the world. And always there
was the sound of the rushing water underneath, the sound which, more
than anything else, meant death; the wearing away of things under the
impact of physical forces which men could direct but never circumvent or
diminish. Then, in the exaltation of love, more than ever it seemed to
him to mean death, the only other thing as strong as love. Under the
moon, under the cold, splendid stars, there were only those two things
awake and sleepless; death and love, the rushing river and his burning
heart.

Alexander sat up and looked about him. The train was tearing on through
the darkness. All his companions in the day-coach were either dozing or
sleeping heavily, and the murky lamps were turned low. How came he here
among all these dirty people ? Why was he going to London ? What did it
mean--what was the answer ? How could this happen to a man who had lived
through that magical spring and summer, and who had felt that the stars
themselves were but flaming particles in the far-away infinitudes of his
love ?

What had he done to lose it ? How could he endure the baseness of life
without it ? And with every revolution of the wheels beneath him, the
unquiet quicksilver in his breast told him that at midsummer he would be
in London. He remembered his last night there: the red foggy darkness,
the hungry crowds before the theatres, the hand-organs, the feverish
rhythm of the blurred, crowded streets, and the feeling of letting
himself go with the crowd. He shuddered and looked about him at the poor
unconscious companions of his journey, unkempt and travel-stained, now
doubled in unlovely attitudes, who had come to stand to him for the
ugliness he had brought into the world.

And those boys back there, beginning it all just as he had begun it; he
wished he could promise them better luck. Ah, if one could promise any
one better luck, if one could assure a single human being of happiness!
He had thought he could do so, once; and it was thinking of that that he
at last fell asleep. In his sleep, as if it had nothing fresher to work
upon, his mind went back and tortured itself with something years and
years away, an old, long-forgotten sorrow of his childhood.

When Alexander awoke in the morning, the sun was just rising through
pale golden ripples of cloud, and the fresh yellow light was vibrating
through the pine woods. The white birches, with their little unfolding
leaves, gleamed in the lowlands, and the marsh meadows were already
coming to life with their first green, a thin, bright color which
had run over them like fire. As the train rushed along the trestles,
thousands of wild birds rose screaming into the light. The sky was
already a pale blue and of the clearness of crystal. Bartley caught
up his bag and hurried through the Pullman coaches until he found the
conductor. There was a stateroom unoccupied, and he took it and set
about changing his clothes. Last night he would not have believed that
anything could be so pleasant as the cold water he dashed over his head
and shoulders and the freshness of clean linen on his body.

After he had dressed, Alexander sat down at the window and drew into his
lungs deep breaths of the pine-scented air. He had awakened with all his
old sense of power. He could not believe that things were as bad with
him as they had seemed last night, that there was no way to set them
entirely right. Even if he went to London at midsummer, what would that
mean except that he was a fool ? And he had been a fool before. That was
not the reality of his life. Yet he knew that he would go to London.

Half an hour later the train stopped at Moorlock. Alexander sprang to
the platform and hurried up the siding, waving to Philip Horton, one
of his assistants, who was anxiously looking up at the windows of the
coaches. Bartley took his arm and they went together into the station
buffet.

“I’ll have my coffee first, Philip. Have you had yours ? And now, what
seems to be the matter up here ?”

The young man, in a hurried, nervous way, began his explanation.

But Alexander cut him short. “When did you stop work ?” he asked sharply.

The young engineer looked confused. “I haven’t stopped work yet,
Mr. Alexander. I didn’t feel that I could go so far without definite
authorization from you.”

“Then why didn’t you say in your telegram exactly what you thought, and
ask for your authorization ? You’d have got it quick enough.”

“Well, really, Mr. Alexander, I couldn’t be absolutely sure, you know,
and I didn’t like to take the responsibility of making it public.”

Alexander pushed back his chair and rose. “Anything I do can be made
public, Phil. You say that you believe the lower chords are showing
strain, and that even the workmen have been talking about it, and yet
you’ve gone on adding weight.”

“I’m sorry, Mr. Alexander, but I had counted on your getting here
yesterday. My first telegram missed you somehow. I sent one Sunday
evening, to the same address, but it was returned to me.”

“Have you a carriage out there ? I must stop to send a wire.”

Alexander went up to the telegraph-desk and penciled the following
message to his wife:--

I may have to be here for some time. Can you come up at once ? Urgent.

BARTLEY.


The Moorlock Bridge lay three miles above the town. When they were
seated in the carriage, Alexander began to question his assistant
further. If it were true that the compression members showed strain,
with the bridge only two thirds done, then there was nothing to do
but pull the whole structure down and begin over again. Horton kept
repeating that he was sure there could be nothing wrong with the
estimates.

Alexander grew impatient. “That’s all true, Phil, but we never were
justified in assuming that a scale that was perfectly safe for an
ordinary bridge would work with anything of such length. It’s all very
well on paper, but it remains to be seen whether it can be done in
practice. I should have thrown up the job when they crowded me. It’s
all nonsense to try to do what other engineers are doing when you know
they’re not sound.”

“But just now, when there is such competition,” the younger man
demurred. “And certainly that’s the new line of development.”

Alexander shrugged his shoulders and made no reply.

When they reached the bridge works, Alexander began his examination
immediately. An hour later he sent for the superintendent. “I think you
had better stop work out there at once, Dan. I should say that the lower
chord here might buckle at any moment. I told the Commission that we
were using higher unit stresses than any practice has established, and
we’ve put the dead load at a low estimate. Theoretically it worked out
well enough, but it had never actually been tried.” Alexander put on
his overcoat and took the superintendent by the arm. “Don’t look so
chopfallen, Dan. It’s a jolt, but we’ve got to face it. It isn’t the end
of the world, you know. Now we’ll go out and call the men off quietly.
They’re already nervous, Horton tells me, and there’s no use alarming
them. I’ll go with you, and we’ll send the end riveters in first.”

Alexander and the superintendent picked their way out slowly over the
long span. They went deliberately, stopping to see what each gang was
doing, as if they were on an ordinary round of inspection. When
they reached the end of the river span, Alexander nodded to the
superintendent, who quietly gave an order to the foreman. The men in the
end gang picked up their tools and, glancing curiously at each other,
started back across the bridge toward the river-bank. Alexander himself
remained standing where they had been working, looking about him. It was
hard to believe, as he looked back over it, that the whole great span
was incurably disabled, was already as good as condemned, because
something was out of line in the lower chord of the cantilever arm.

The end riveters had reached the bank and were dispersing among the
tool-houses, and the second gang had picked up their tools and were
starting toward the shore. Alexander, still standing at the end of the
river span, saw the lower chord of the cantilever arm give a little,
like an elbow bending. He shouted and ran after the second gang, but by
this time every one knew that the big river span was slowly settling.
There was a burst of shouting that was immediately drowned by the scream
and cracking of tearing iron, as all the tension work began to pull
asunder. Once the chords began to buckle, there were thousands of tons
of ironwork, all riveted together and lying in midair without support.
It tore itself to pieces with roaring and grinding and noises that were
like the shrieks of a steam whistle. There was no shock of any kind; the
bridge had no impetus except from its own weight. It lurched neither
to right nor left, but sank almost in a vertical line, snapping and
breaking and tearing as it went, because no integral part could bear for
an instant the enormous strain loosed upon it. Some of the men jumped
and some ran, trying to make the shore.

At the first shriek of the tearing iron, Alexander jumped from the
downstream side of the bridge. He struck the water without injury and
disappeared. He was under the river a long time and had great difficulty
in holding his breath. When it seemed impossible, and his chest was
about to heave, he thought he heard his wife telling him that he could
hold out a little longer. An instant later his face cleared the water.
For a moment, in the depths of the river, he had realized what it would
mean to die a hypocrite, and to lie dead under the last abandonment of
her tenderness. But once in the light and air, he knew he should live to
tell her and to recover all he had lost. Now, at last, he felt sure of
himself. He was not startled. It seemed to him that he had been through
something of this sort before. There was nothing horrible about it.
This, too, was life, and life was activity, just as it was in Boston
or in London. He was himself, and there was something to be done;
everything seemed perfectly natural. Alexander was a strong swimmer, but
he had gone scarcely a dozen strokes when the bridge itself, which had
been settling faster and faster, crashed into the water behind him.
Immediately the river was full of drowning men. A gang of French
Canadians fell almost on top of him. He thought he had cleared them,
when they began coming up all around him, clutching at him and at each
other. Some of them could swim, but they were either hurt or crazed with
fright. Alexander tried to beat them off, but there were too many of
them. One caught him about the neck, another gripped him about the
middle, and they went down together. When he sank, his wife seemed to be
there in the water beside him, telling him to keep his head, that if he
could hold out the men would drown and release him. There was something
he wanted to tell his wife, but he could not think clearly for the
roaring in his ears. Suddenly he remembered what it was. He caught his
breath, and then she let him go.


The work of recovering the dead went on all day and all the following
night. By the next morning forty-eight bodies had been taken out of the
river, but there were still twenty missing. Many of the men had fallen
with the bridge and were held down under the debris. Early on the
morning of the second day a closed carriage was driven slowly along the
river-bank and stopped a little below the works, where the river boiled
and churned about the great iron carcass which lay in a straight line
two thirds across it. The carriage stood there hour after hour, and word
soon spread among the crowds on the shore that its occupant was the wife
of the Chief Engineer; his body had not yet been found. The widows of
the lost workmen, moving up and down the bank with shawls over their
heads, some of them carrying babies, looked at the rusty hired hack many
times that morning. They drew near it and walked about it, but none of
them ventured to peer within. Even half-indifferent sightseers dropped
their voices as they told a newcomer: “You see that carriage over there ?
That’s Mrs. Alexander. They haven’t found him yet. She got off the train
this morning. Horton met her. She heard it in Boston yesterday--heard
the newsboys crying it in the street.”

At noon Philip Horton made his way through the crowd with a tray and a
tin coffee-pot from the camp kitchen. When he reached the carriage
he found Mrs. Alexander just as he had left her in the early morning,
leaning forward a little, with her hand on the lowered window, looking
at the river. Hour after hour she had been watching the water, the
lonely, useless stone towers, and the convulsed mass of iron wreckage
over which the angry river continually spat up its yellow foam.

“Those poor women out there, do they blame him very much ?” she asked, as
she handed the coffee-cup back to Horton.

“Nobody blames him, Mrs. Alexander. If any one is to blame, I’m afraid
it’s I. I should have stopped work before he came. He said so as soon as
I met him. I tried to get him here a day earlier, but my telegram missed
him, somehow. He didn’t have time really to explain to me. If he’d got
here Monday, he’d have had all the men off at once. But, you see, Mrs.
Alexander, such a thing never happened before. According to all human
calculations, it simply couldn’t happen.”

Horton leaned wearily against the front wheel of the cab. He had not had
his clothes off for thirty hours, and the stimulus of violent excitement
was beginning to wear off.

“Don’t be afraid to tell me the worst, Mr. Horton. Don’t leave me to the
dread of finding out things that people may be saying. If he is blamed,
if he needs any one to speak for him,”--for the first time her voice
broke and a flush of life, tearful, painful, and confused, swept over
her rigid pallor,--“if he needs any one, tell me, show me what to do.”
 She began to sob, and Horton hurried away.

When he came back at four o’clock in the afternoon he was carrying his
hat in his hand, and Winifred knew as soon as she saw him that they had
found Bartley. She opened the carriage door before he reached her and
stepped to the ground.

Horton put out his hand as if to hold her back and spoke pleadingly:
“Won’t you drive up to my house, Mrs. Alexander ? They will take him up
there.”

“Take me to him now, please. I shall not make any trouble.”

The group of men down under the riverbank fell back when they saw a
woman coming, and one of them threw a tarpaulin over the stretcher. They
took off their hats and caps as Winifred approached, and although she
had pulled her veil down over her face they did not look up at her. She
was taller than Horton, and some of the men thought she was the tallest
woman they had ever seen. “As tall as himself,” some one whispered.
Horton motioned to the men, and six of them lifted the stretcher
and began to carry it up the embankment. Winifred followed them the
half-mile to Horton’s house. She walked quietly, without once breaking
or stumbling. When the bearers put the stretcher down in Horton’s spare
bedroom, she thanked them and gave her hand to each in turn. The men
went out of the house and through the yard with their caps in their
hands. They were too much confused to say anything as they went down the
hill.

Horton himself was almost as deeply perplexed. “Mamie,” he said to his
wife, when he came out of the spare room half an hour later, “will you
take Mrs. Alexander the things she needs ? She is going to do everything
herself. Just stay about where you can hear her and go in if she wants
you.”

Everything happened as Alexander had foreseen in that moment of
prescience under the river. With her own hands she washed him clean of
every mark of disaster. All night he was alone with her in the still
house, his great head lying deep in the pillow. In the pocket of his
coat Winifred found the letter that he had written her the night before
he left New York, water-soaked and illegible, but because of its length,
she knew it had been meant for her.

For Alexander death was an easy creditor. Fortune, which had smiled
upon him consistently all his life, did not desert him in the end.
His harshest critics did not doubt that, had he lived, he would have
retrieved himself. Even Lucius Wilson did not see in this accident the
disaster he had once foretold.

When a great man dies in his prime there is no surgeon who can say
whether he did well; whether or not the future was his, as it seemed to
be. The mind that society had come to regard as a powerful and reliable
machine, dedicated to its service, may for a long time have been sick
within itself and bent upon its own destruction.



EPILOGUE


Professor Wilson had been living in London for six years and he was just
back from a visit to America. One afternoon, soon after his return, he
put on his frock-coat and drove in a hansom to pay a call upon Hilda
Burgoyne, who still lived at her old number, off Bedford Square. He
and Miss Burgoyne had been fast friends for a long time. He had first
noticed her about the corridors of the British Museum, where he read
constantly. Her being there so often had made him feel that he would
like to know her, and as she was not an inaccessible person, an
introduction was not difficult. The preliminaries once over, they came
to depend a great deal upon each other, and Wilson, after his day’s
reading, often went round to Bedford Square for his tea. They had much
more in common than their memories of a common friend. Indeed, they
seldom spoke of him. They saved that for the deep moments which do not
come often, and then their talk of him was mostly silence. Wilson knew
that Hilda had loved him; more than this he had not tried to know.

It was late when Wilson reached Hilda’s apartment on this particular
December afternoon, and he found her alone. She sent for fresh tea
and made him comfortable, as she had such a knack of making people
comfortable.

“How good you were to come back before Christmas! I quite dreaded the
Holidays without you. You’ve helped me over a good many Christmases.”
 She smiled at him gayly.

“As if you needed me for that! But, at any rate, I needed YOU. How well
you are looking, my dear, and how rested.”

He peered up at her from his low chair, balancing the tips of his long
fingers together in a judicial manner which had grown on him with years.

Hilda laughed as she carefully poured his cream. “That means that I was
looking very seedy at the end of the season, doesn’t it ? Well, we must
show wear at last, you know.”

Wilson took the cup gratefully. “Ah, no need to remind a man of
seventy, who has just been home to find that he has survived all his
contemporaries. I was most gently treated--as a sort of precious relic.
But, do you know, it made me feel awkward to be hanging about still.”

“Seventy ? Never mention it to me.” Hilda looked appreciatively at the
Professor’s alert face, with so many kindly lines about the mouth and
so many quizzical ones about the eyes. “You’ve got to hang about for
me, you know. I can’t even let you go home again. You must stay put, now
that I have you back. You’re the realest thing I have.”

Wilson chuckled. “Dear me, am I ? Out of so many conquests and the spoils
of conquered cities! You’ve really missed me ? Well, then, I shall hang.
Even if you have at last to put ME in the mummy-room with the others.
You’ll visit me often, won’t you ?”

“Every day in the calendar. Here, your cigarettes are in this drawer,
where you left them.” She struck a match and lit one for him. “But you
did, after all, enjoy being at home again ?”

“Oh, yes. I found the long railway journeys trying. People live a
thousand miles apart. But I did it thoroughly; I was all over the place.
It was in Boston I lingered longest.”

“Ah, you saw Mrs. Alexander ?”

“Often. I dined with her, and had tea there a dozen different times,
I should think. Indeed, it was to see her that I lingered on and on.
I found that I still loved to go to the house. It always seemed as if
Bartley were there, somehow, and that at any moment one might hear his
heavy tramp on the stairs. Do you know, I kept feeling that he must be
up in his study.” The Professor looked reflectively into the grate. “I
should really have liked to go up there. That was where I had my last
long talk with him. But Mrs. Alexander never suggested it.”

“Why ?”

Wilson was a little startled by her tone, and he turned his head so
quickly that his cuff-link caught the string of his nose-glasses and
pulled them awry. “Why ? Why, dear me, I don’t know. She probably never
thought of it.”

Hilda bit her lip. “I don’t know what made me say that. I didn’t mean to
interrupt. Go on please, and tell me how it was.”

“Well, it was like that. Almost as if he were there. In a way, he really
is there. She never lets him go. It’s the most beautiful and dignified
sorrow I’ve ever known. It’s so beautiful that it has its compensations,
I should think. Its very completeness is a compensation. It gives her
a fixed star to steer by. She doesn’t drift. We sat there evening after
evening in the quiet of that magically haunted room, and watched the
sunset burn on the river, and felt him. Felt him with a difference, of
course.”

Hilda leaned forward, her elbow on her knee, her chin on her hand. “With
a difference ? Because of her, you mean ?”

Wilson’s brow wrinkled. “Something like that, yes. Of course, as
time goes on, to her he becomes more and more their simple personal
relation.”

Hilda studied the droop of the Professor’s head intently. “You didn’t
altogether like that ? You felt it wasn’t wholly fair to him ?”

Wilson shook himself and readjusted his glasses. “Oh, fair enough. More
than fair. Of course, I always felt that my image of him was just a
little different from hers. No relation is so complete that it can
hold absolutely all of a person. And I liked him just as he was; his
deviations, too; the places where he didn’t square.”

Hilda considered vaguely. “Has she grown much older ?” she asked at last.

“Yes, and no. In a tragic way she is even handsomer. But colder. Cold
for everything but him. `Forget thyself to marble’; I kept thinking of
that. Her happiness was a happiness a deux, not apart from the world,
but actually against it. And now her grief is like that. She saves
herself for it and doesn’t even go through the form of seeing people
much. I’m sorry. It would be better for her, and might be so good for
them, if she could let other people in.”

“Perhaps she’s afraid of letting him out a little, of sharing him with
somebody.”

Wilson put down his cup and looked up with vague alarm. “Dear me, it
takes a woman to think of that, now! I don’t, you know, think we ought
to be hard on her. More, even, than the rest of us she didn’t choose her
destiny. She underwent it. And it has left her chilled. As to her not
wishing to take the world into her confidence--well, it is a pretty
brutal and stupid world, after all, you know.”

Hilda leaned forward. “Yes, I know, I know. Only I can’t help being glad
that there was something for him even in stupid and vulgar people. My
little Marie worshiped him. When she is dusting I always know when she
has come to his picture.”

Wilson nodded. “Oh, yes! He left an echo. The ripples go on in all of
us. He belonged to the people who make the play, and most of us are only
onlookers at the best. We shouldn’t wonder too much at Mrs. Alexander.
She must feel how useless it would be to stir about, that she may as
well sit still; that nothing can happen to her after Bartley.”

“Yes,” said Hilda softly, “nothing can happen to one after Bartley.”

They both sat looking into the fire.



                       *****





THE BARREL ORGAN  by  Alfred Noyes



  There’s a barrel-organ caroling across a golden street,
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  And the music’s not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
    And fulfilled it with the sunset glow;
  And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
    That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light;
  And they’ve given it a glory and a part to play again
    In the Symphony that rules the day and the night.

  And now it’s marching onward through the realms of old romance,
    And trolling out a fond familiar tune,
  And now it’s roaring cannon down to fight the King of France,
    And now it’s prattling softly to the moon,
  And all around the organ there’s a sea without a shore
    Of human joys and wonders and regrets;
  To remember and to recompense the music evermore
    For what the cold machinery forgets. . . .

  Yes; as the music changes,
    Like a prismatic glass,
  It takes the light and ranges
    Through all the moods that pass;
  Dissects the common carnival
    Of passions and regrets,
  And gives the world a glimpse of all
    The colors it forgets.

  And there LA TRAVIATA sights
    Another sadder song;
  And there IL TROVATORE cries
    A tale of deeper wrong;
  And bolder knights to battle go
    With sword and shield and lance,
  Than ever here on earth below
    Have whirled into--A DANCE!--

  Go down to Kew in lilac time; in lilac time; in lilac time;
  Go down to Kew in lilac time; (it isn’t far from London!)
  And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer’s wonderland;
  Go down to Kew in lilac time; (it isn’t far from London!)

  The cherry-trees are seas of bloom and soft perfume and sweet perfume,
  The cherry-trees are seas of bloom (and oh, so near to London!)
  And there they say, when dawn is high and all the world’s a blaze of sky
  The cuckoo, though he’s very shy, will sing a song for London.

  The nightingale is rather rare and yet they say you’ll hear him there
  At Kew, at Kew in lilac time (and oh, so near to London!)
  The linnet and the throstle, too, and after dark the long halloo
  And golden-eyed TU-WHIT, TU WHOO of owls that ogle London.

  For Noah hardly knew a bird of any kind that isn’t heard
  At Kew, at Kew in lilac time (and oh, so near to London!)
  And when the rose begins to pout and all the chestnut spires are out
  You’ll hear the rest without a doubt, all chorusing for London:--

  COME DOWN TO KEW IN LILAC TIME; IN LILAC TIME; IN LILAC TIME;
  COME DOWN TO KEW IN LILAC TIME; (IT ISN’T FAR FROM LONDON!)
  AND YOU SHALL WANDER HAND IN HAND WITH LOVE IN SUMMER’S WONDERLAND;
  COME DOWN TO KEW IN LILAC TIME; (IT ISN’T FAR FROM LONDON!)

  And then the troubadour begins to thrill the golden street,
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  And in all the gaudy busses there are scores of weary feet
  Marking time, sweet time, with a dull mechanic beat,
  And a thousand hearts are plunging to a love they’ll never meet,
  Through the meadows of the sunset, through the poppies and the wheat,
    In the land where the dead dreams go.

  Verdi, Verdi, when you wrote IL TROVATORE did you dream
    Of the City when the sun sinks low
  Of the organ and the monkey and the many-colored stream
  On the Piccadilly pavement, of the myriad eyes that seem
  To be litten for a moment with a wild Italian gleam
  As A CHE LA MORTE parodies the world’s eternal theme
    And pulses with the sunset glow ?

  There’s a thief, perhaps, that listens with a face of frozen stone
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  There’s a portly man of business with a balance of his own,
  There’s a clerk and there’s a butcher of a soft reposeful tone,
  And they’re all them returning to the heavens they have known:
  They are crammed and jammed in busses and--they’re each of them alone
    In the land where the dead dreams go.

  There’s a very modish woman and her smile is very bland
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  And her hansom jingles onward, but her little jeweled hand
  Is clenched a little tighter and she cannot understand
  What she wants or why she wanders to that undiscovered land,
  For the parties there are not at all the sort of thing she planned,
    In the land where the dead dreams go.

  There’s an Oxford man that listens and his heart is crying out
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  For the barge the eight, the Isis, and the coach’s whoop and shout,
  For the minute gun, the counting and the long disheveled rout,
  For the howl along the tow-path and a fate that’s still in doubt,
  For a roughened oar to handle and a race to think about
    In the land where the dead dreams go.

  There’s a laborer that listen to the voices of the dead
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  And his hand begins to tremble and his face is rather red
  As he sees a loafer watching him and--there he turns his head
  And stares into the sunset where his April love is fled,
  For he hears her softly singing and his lonely soul is led
    Through the land where the dead dreams go.

  There’s and old and hardened demi-rep, it’s ringing in her ears,
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  With the wild and empty sorrow of the love that blights and sears,
  Oh, and if she hurries onward, then be sure, be sure she hears,
  Hears and bears the bitter burden of the unforgotten years,
  And her laugh’s a little harsher and her eyes are brimmed with tears
    For the land where the dead dreams go.

  There’s a barrel-organ caroling across a golden street,
    In the City as the sun sinks low;
  Though the music’s only Verdi there’s a world to make it sweet
  Just as yonder yellow sunset where the earth and heaven meet
  Mellows all the sooty City!  Hark, a hundred thousand feet
  Are marching on to glory through the poppies and the wheat
    In the land where the dead dreams go.

            So it’s Jeremiah, Jeremiah,
              What have you to say
            When you meet the garland girls
              Tripping on their way ?

            All around my gala hat
              I wear a wreath of roses
            (A long and lonely year it is
              I’ve waited for the May!)

            If any one should ask you,
              The reason why I wear it is,
            My own love, my true love, is coming home to-day.

  It’s buy a bunch of violets for the lady
    (IT’S LILAC TIME IN LONDON; IT’S LILAC TIME IN LONDON!)
  Buy a bunch of violets for the lady;
    While the sky burns blue above:

  On the other side of the street you’ll find it shady
    (IT’S LILAC TIME IN LONDON; IT’S LILAC TIME IN LONDON!)
  But buy a bunch of violets for the lady;
    And tell her she’s your own true love.

  There’s a barrel-organ caroling across a golden street,
    In the City as the sun sinks glittering and slow;
  And the music’s not immortal, but the world has made it sweet
  And enriched it with the harmonies that make a song complete
  In the deeper heavens of music where the night and morning meet,
    As it dies into the sunset glow;

  And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
    That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light,
  And they’ve given it a glory and a part of play again
    In the Symphony that rules the day and night.

            And there, as the music changes,
              The song runs round again;
            Once more it turns and ranges
              Through all its joy and pain:
            Dissects the common carnival
              Of passions and regrets;
            And the wheeling world remembers all
              The wheeling song forgets.

            Once more La TRAVIATA sighs
              Another sadder song:
            Once more IL TROVATORE cries
              A tale of deeper wrong;
            Once more the knights to battle go
              With sword and shield and lance,
            Till once, once more, the shattered foe
              Has whirled into--A DANCE--

  Come down to Kew in lilac time; in lilac time; in lilac time;
  Come down to Kew in lilac time; (it isn’t far from London!)
  And you shall wander hand in hand with Love in summer’s wonderland;
  Come down to Kew in lilac time; (it isn’t far from London!)

  COME DOWN TO KEW IN LILAC TIME; IN LILAC TIME; IN LILAC TIME;
  COME DOWN TO KEW IN LILAC TIME; (IT ISN’T FAR FROM LONDON!)
  AND YOU SHALL WANDER HAND IN HAND WITH LOVE IN SUMMER’S WONDERLAND;
  COME DOWN TO KEW IN LILAC TIME; (IT ISN’T FAR FROM LONDON!) 

  My Antonia

 THE SHIMERDAS




I


I FIRST heard of Antonia(1) on what seemed to me an interminable journey
across the great midland plain of North America. I was ten years old then;
I had lost both my father and mother within a year, and my Virginia
relatives were sending me out to my grandparents, who lived in Nebraska. I
traveled in the care of a mountain boy, Jake Marpole, one of the â€œhandsâ€
on my fatherâ€™s old farm under the Blue Ridge, who was now going West to
work for my grandfather. Jakeâ€™s experience of the world was not much wider
than mine. He had never been in a railway train until the morning when we
set out together to try our fortunes in a new world.

We went all the way in day-coaches, becoming more sticky and grimy with
each stage of the journey. Jake bought everything the newsboys offered
him: candy, oranges, brass collar buttons, a watch-charm, and for me a
â€œLife of Jesse James,â€ which I remember as one of the most satisfactory
books I have ever read. Beyond Chicago we were under the protection of a
friendly passenger conductor, who knew all about the country to which we
were going and gave us a great deal of advice in exchange for our
confidence. He seemed to us an experienced and worldly man who had been
almost everywhere; in his conversation he threw out lightly the names of
distant States and cities. He wore the rings and pins and badges of
different fraternal orders to which he belonged. Even his cuff-buttons
were engraved with hieroglyphics, and he was more inscribed than an
Egyptian obelisk. Once when he sat down to chat, he told us that in the
immigrant car ahead there was a family from â€œacross the waterâ€ whose
destination was the same as ours.

â€œThey canâ€™t any of them speak English, except one little girl, and all she
can say is â€˜We go Black Hawk, Nebraska.â€™ Sheâ€™s not much older than you,
twelve or thirteen, maybe, and sheâ€™s as bright as a new dollar. Donâ€™t you
want to go ahead and see her, Jimmy ? Sheâ€™s got the pretty brown eyes,
too!â€

This last remark made me bashful, and I shook my head and settled down to
â€œJesse James.â€ Jake nodded at me approvingly and said you were likely to
get diseases from foreigners.

I do not remember crossing the Missouri River, or anything about the long
dayâ€™s journey through Nebraska. Probably by that time I had crossed so
many rivers that I was dull to them. The only thing very noticeable about
Nebraska was that it was still, all day long, Nebraska.

I had been sleeping, curled up in a red plush seat, for a long while when
we reached Black Hawk. Jake roused me and took me by the hand. We stumbled
down from the train to a wooden siding, where men were running about with
lanterns. I could nâ€™t see any town, or even distant lights; we were
surrounded by utter darkness. The engine was panting heavily after its
long run. In the red glow from the fire-box, a group of people stood
huddled together on the platform, encumbered by bundles and boxes. I knew
this must be the immigrant family the conductor had told us about. The
woman wore a fringed shawl tied over her head, and she carried a little
tin trunk in her arms, hugging it as if it were a baby. There was an old
man, tall and stooped. Two half-grown boys and a girl stood holding
oil-cloth bundles, and a little girl clung to her motherâ€™s skirts.
Presently a man with a lantern approached them and began to talk, shouting
and exclaiming. I pricked up my ears, for it was positively the first time
I had ever heard a foreign tongue.

Another lantern came along. A bantering voice called out: â€œHello, are you
Mr. Burdenâ€™s folks ? If you are, itâ€™s me youâ€™re looking for. Iâ€™m Otto
Fuchs. Iâ€™m Mr. Burdenâ€™s hired man, and Iâ€™m to drive you out. Hello, Jimmy,
ainâ€™t you scared to come so far west ?â€

 [Illustration: Immigrant family huddled together on the train platform]

I looked up with interest at the new face in the lantern light. He might
have stepped out of the pages of â€œJesse James.â€ He wore a sombrero hat,
with a wide leather band and a bright buckle, and the ends of his mustache
were twisted up stiffly, like little horns. He looked lively and
ferocious, I thought, and as if he had a history. A long scar ran across
one cheek and drew the corner of his mouth up in a sinister curl. The top
of his left ear was gone, and his skin was brown as an Indianâ€™s. Surely
this was the face of a desperado. As he walked about the platform in his
high-heeled boots, looking for our trunks, I saw that he was a rather
slight man, quick and wiry, and light on his feet. He told us we had a
long night drive ahead of us, and had better be on the hike. He led us to
a hitching-bar where two farm wagons were tied, and I saw the foreign
family crowding into one of them. The other was for us. Jake got on the
front seat with Otto Fuchs, and I rode on the straw in the bottom of the
wagon-box, covered up with a buffalo hide. The immigrants rumbled off into
the empty darkness, and we followed them.

I tried to go to sleep, but the jolting made me bite my tongue, and I soon
began to ache all over. When the straw settled down I had a hard bed.
Cautiously I slipped from under the buffalo hide, got up on my knees and
peered over the side of the wagon. There seemed to be nothing to see; no
fences, no creeks or trees, no hills or fields. If there was a road, I
could not make it out in the faint starlight. There was nothing but land:
not a country at all, but the material out of which countries are made.
No, there was nothing but landâ€”slightly undulating, I knew, because often
our wheels ground against the brake as we went down into a hollow and
lurched up again on the other side. I had the feeling that the world was
left behind, that we had got over the edge of it, and were outside manâ€™s
jurisdiction. I had never before looked up at the sky when there was not a
familiar mountain ridge against it. But this was the complete dome of
heaven, all there was of it. I did not believe that my dead father and
mother were watching me from up there; they would still be looking for me
at the sheep-fold down by the creek, or along the white road that led to
the mountain pastures. I had left even their spirits behind me. The wagon
jolted on, carrying me I knew not whither. I donâ€™t think I was homesick.
If we never arrived anywhere, it did not matter. Between that earth and
that sky I felt erased, blotted out. I did not say my prayers that night:
here, I felt, what would be would be.




II


I DO not remember our arrival at my grandfatherâ€™s farm sometime before
daybreak, after a drive of nearly twenty miles with heavy work-horses.
When I awoke, it was afternoon. I was lying in a little room, scarcely
larger than the bed that held me, and the window-shade at my head was
flapping softly in a warm wind. A tall woman, with wrinkled brown skin and
black hair, stood looking down at me; I knew that she must be my
grandmother. She had been crying, I could see, but when I opened my eyes
she smiled, peered at me anxiously, and sat down on the foot of my bed.

â€œHad a good sleep, Jimmy ?â€ she asked briskly. Then in a very different
tone she said, as if to herself, â€œMy, how you do look like your father!â€ I
remembered that my father had been her little boy; she must often have
come to wake him like this when he overslept. â€œHere are your clean
clothes,â€ she went on, stroking my coverlid with her brown hand as she
talked. â€œBut first you come down to the kitchen with me, and have a nice
warm bath behind the stove. Bring your things; thereâ€™s nobody about.â€

â€œDown to the kitchenâ€ struck me as curious; it was always â€œout in the
kitchenâ€ at home. I picked up my shoes and stockings and followed her
through the living-room and down a flight of stairs into a basement. This
basement was divided into a dining-room at the right of the stairs and a
kitchen at the left. Both rooms were plastered and whitewashedâ€”the plaster
laid directly upon the earth walls, as it used to be in dugouts. The floor
was of hard cement. Up under the wooden ceiling there were little
half-windows with white curtains, and pots of geraniums and wandering Jew
in the deep sills. As I entered the kitchen I sniffed a pleasant smell of
gingerbread baking. The stove was very large, with bright nickel
trimmings, and behind it there was a long wooden bench against the wall,
and a tin washtub, into which grandmother poured hot and cold water. When
she brought the soap and towels, I told her that I was used to taking my
bath without help.

â€œCan you do your ears, Jimmy ? Are you sure ? Well, now, I call you a right
smart little boy.â€

It was pleasant there in the kitchen. The sun shone into my bath-water
through the west half-window, and a big Maltese cat came up and rubbed
himself against the tub, watching me curiously. While I scrubbed, my
grandmother busied herself in the dining-room until I called anxiously,
â€œGrandmother, Iâ€™m afraid the cakes are burning!â€ Then she came laughing,
waving her apron before her as if she were shooing chickens.

She was a spare, tall woman, a little stooped, and she was apt to carry
her head thrust forward in an attitude of attention, as if she were
looking at something, or listening to something, far away. As I grew
older, I came to believe that it was only because she was so often
thinking of things that were far away. She was quick-footed and energetic
in all her movements. Her voice was high and rather shrill, and she often
spoke with an anxious inflection, for she was exceedingly desirous that
everything should go with due order and decorum. Her laugh, too, was high,
and perhaps a little strident, but there was a lively intelligence in it.
She was then fifty-five years old, a strong woman, of unusual endurance.

After I was dressed I explored the long cellar next the kitchen. It was
dug out under the wing of the house, was plastered and cemented, with a
stairway and an outside door by which the men came and went. Under one of
the windows there was a place for them to wash when they came in from
work.

While my grandmother was busy about supper I settled myself on the wooden
bench behind the stove and got acquainted with the catâ€”he caught not only
rats and mice, but gophers, I was told. The patch of yellow sunlight on
the floor traveled back toward the stairway, and grandmother and I talked
about my journey, and about the arrival of the new Bohemian family; she
said they were to be our nearest neighbors. We did not talk about the farm
in Virginia, which had been her home for so many years. But after the men
came in from the fields, and we were all seated at the supper-table, then
she asked Jake about the old place and about our friends and neighbors
there.

My grandfather said little. When he first came in he kissed me and spoke
kindly to me, but he was not demonstrative. I felt at once his
deliberateness and personal dignity, and was a little in awe of him. The
thing one immediately noticed about him was his beautiful, crinkly,
snow-white beard. I once heard a missionary say it was like the beard of
an Arabian sheik. His bald crown only made it more impressive.

Grandfatherâ€™s eyes were not at all like those of an old man; they were
bright blue, and had a fresh, frosty sparkle. His teeth were white and
regularâ€”so sound that he had never been to a dentist in his life. He had a
delicate skin, easily roughened by sun and wind. When he was a young man
his hair and beard were red; his eyebrows were still coppery.

As we sat at the table Otto Fuchs and I kept stealing covert glances at
each other. Grandmother had told me while she was getting supper that he
was an Austrian who came to this country a young boy and had led an
adventurous life in the Far West among mining-camps and cow outfits. His
iron constitution was somewhat broken by mountain pneumonia, and he had
drifted back to live in a milder country for a while. He had relatives in
Bismarck, a German settlement to the north of us, but for a year now he
had been working for grandfather.

The minute supper was over, Otto took me into the kitchen to whisper to me
about a pony down in the barn that had been bought for me at a sale; he
had been riding him to find out whether he had any bad tricks, but he was
a â€œperfect gentleman,â€ and his name was Dude. Fuchs told me everything I
wanted to know: how he had lost his ear in a Wyoming blizzard when he was
a stage-driver, and how to throw a lasso. He promised to rope a steer for
me before sundown next day. He got out his â€œchapsâ€ and silver spurs to
show them to Jake and me, and his best cowboy boots, with tops stitched in
bold designâ€”roses, and true-loverâ€™s knots, and undraped female figures.
These, he solemnly explained, were angels.

Before we went to bed Jake and Otto were called up to the living-room for
prayers. Grandfather put on silver-rimmed spectacles and read several
Psalms. His voice was so sympathetic and he read so interestingly that I
wished he had chosen one of my favorite chapters in the Book of Kings. I
was awed by his intonation of the word â€œSelah.â€ â€œ_He shall choose our
inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom He loved. Selah._â€ I had
no idea what the word meant; perhaps he had not. But, as he uttered it, it
became oracular, the most sacred of words.

Early the next morning I ran out of doors to look about me. I had been
told that ours was the only wooden house west of Black Hawkâ€”until you came
to the Norwegian settlement, where there were several. Our neighbors lived
in sod houses and dugoutsâ€”comfortable, but not very roomy. Our white frame
house, with a story and half-story above the basement, stood at the east
end of what I might call the farmyard, with the windmill close by the
kitchen door. From the windmill the ground sloped westward, down to the
barns and granaries and pig-yards. This slope was trampled hard and bare,
and washed out in winding gullies by the rain. Beyond the corncribs, at
the bottom of the shallow draw, was a muddy little pond, with rusty willow
bushes growing about it. The road from the post-office came directly by
our door, crossed the farmyard, and curved round this little pond, beyond
which it began to climb the gentle swell of unbroken prairie to the west.
There, along the western sky-line, it skirted a great cornfield, much
larger than any field I had ever seen. This cornfield, and the sorghum
patch behind the barn, were the only broken land in sight. Everywhere, as
far as the eye could reach, there was nothing but rough, shaggy, red
grass, most of it as tall as I.

North of the house, inside the ploughed fire-breaks, grew a thick-set
strip of box-elder trees, low and bushy, their leaves already turning
yellow. This hedge was nearly a quarter of a mile long, but I had to look
very hard to see it at all. The little trees were insignificant against
the grass. It seemed as if the grass were about to run over them, and over
the plum-patch behind the sod chicken-house.

As I looked about me I felt that the grass was the country, as the water
is the sea. The red of the grass made all the great prairie the color of
wine-stains, or of certain seaweeds when they are first washed up. And
there was so much motion in it; the whole country seemed, somehow, to be
running.

I had almost forgotten that I had a grandmother, when she came out, her
sunbonnet on her head, a grain-sack in her hand, and asked me if I did not
want to go to the garden with her to dig potatoes for dinner. The garden,
curiously enough, was a quarter of a mile from the house, and the way to
it led up a shallow draw past the cattle corral. Grandmother called my
attention to a stout hickory cane, tipped with copper, which hung by a
leather thong from her belt. This, she said, was her rattlesnake cane. I
must never go to the garden without a heavy stick or a corn-knife; she had
killed a good many rattlers on her way back and forth. A little girl who
lived on the Black Hawk road was bitten on the ankle and had been sick all
summer.

I can remember exactly how the country looked to me as I walked beside my
grandmother along the faint wagon-tracks on that early September morning.
Perhaps the glide of long railway travel was still with me, for more than
anything else I felt motion in the landscape; in the fresh, easy-blowing
morning wind, and in the earth itself, as if the shaggy grass were a sort
of loose hide, and underneath it herds of wild buffalo were galloping,
galloping â€¦

Alone, I should never have found the gardenâ€”except, perhaps, for the big
yellow pumpkins that lay about unprotected by their withering vinesâ€”and I
felt very little interest in it when I got there. I wanted to walk
straight on through the red grass and over the edge of the world, which
could not be very far away. The light air about me told me that the world
ended here: only the ground and sun and sky were left, and if one went a
little farther there would be only sun and sky, and one would float off
into them, like the tawny hawks which sailed over our heads making slow
shadows on the grass. While grandmother took the pitchfork we found
standing in one of the rows and dug potatoes, while I picked them up out
of the soft brown earth and put them into the bag, I kept looking up at
the hawks that were doing what I might so easily do.

When grandmother was ready to go, I said I would like to stay up there in
the garden awhile.

She peered down at me from under her sunbonnet. â€œAre nâ€™t you afraid of
snakes ?â€

â€œA little,â€ I admitted, â€œbut Iâ€™d like to stay anyhow.â€

â€œWell, if you see one, donâ€™t have anything to do with him. The big yellow
and brown ones wonâ€™t hurt you; theyâ€™re bull-snakes and help to keep the
gophers down. Donâ€™t be scared if you see anything look out of that hole in
the bank over there. Thatâ€™s a badger hole. Heâ€™s about as big as a big
â€™possum, and his face is striped, black and white. He takes a chicken once
in a while, but I wonâ€™t let the men harm him. In a new country a body
feels friendly to the animals. I like to have him come out and watch me
when Iâ€™m at work.â€

Grandmother swung the bag of potatoes over her shoulder and went down the
path, leaning forward a little. The road followed the windings of the
draw; when she came to the first bend she waved at me and disappeared. I
was left alone with this new feeling of lightness and content.

I sat down in the middle of the garden, where snakes could scarcely
approach unseen, and leaned my back against a warm yellow pumpkin. There
were some ground-cherry bushes growing along the furrows, full of fruit. I
turned back the papery triangular sheaths that protected the berries and
ate a few. All about me giant grasshoppers, twice as big as any I had ever
seen, were doing acrobatic feats among the dried vines. The gophers
scurried up and down the ploughed ground. There in the sheltered
draw-bottom the wind did not blow very hard, but I could hear it singing
its humming tune up on the level, and I could see the tall grasses wave.
The earth was warm under me, and warm as I crumbled it through my fingers.
Queer little red bugs came out and moved in slow squadrons around me.
Their backs were polished vermilion, with black spots. I kept as still as
I could. Nothing happened. I did not expect anything to happen. I was
something that lay under the sun and felt it, like the pumpkins, and I did
not want to be anything more. I was entirely happy. Perhaps we feel like
that when we die and become a part of something entire, whether it is sun
and air, or goodness and knowledge. At any rate, that is happiness; to be
dissolved into something complete and great. When it comes to one, it
comes as naturally as sleep.




III


ON Sunday morning Otto Fuchs was to drive us over to make the acquaintance
of our new Bohemian neighbors. We were taking them some provisions, as
they had come to live on a wild place where there was no garden or
chicken-house, and very little broken land. Fuchs brought up a sack of
potatoes and a piece of cured pork from the cellar, and grandmother packed
some loaves of Saturdayâ€™s bread, a jar of butter, and several pumpkin pies
in the straw of the wagon-box. We clambered up to the front seat and
jolted off past the little pond and along the road that climbed to the big
cornfield.

I could hardly wait to see what lay beyond that cornfield; but there was
only red grass like ours, and nothing else, though from the high
wagon-seat one could look off a long way. The road ran about like a wild
thing, avoiding the deep draws, crossing them where they were wide and
shallow. And all along it, wherever it looped or ran, the sunflowers grew;
some of them were as big as little trees, with great rough leaves and many
branches which bore dozens of blossoms. They made a gold ribbon across the
prairie. Occasionally one of the horses would tear off with his teeth a
plant full of blossoms, and walk along munching it, the flowers nodding in
time to his bites as he ate down toward them.

The Bohemian family, grandmother told me as we drove along, had bought the
homestead of a fellow-countryman, Peter Krajiek, and had paid him more
than it was worth. Their agreement with him was made before they left the
old country, through a cousin of his, who was also a relative of Mrs.
Shimerda. The Shimerdas were the first Bohemian family to come to this
part of the county. Krajiek was their only interpreter, and could tell
them anything he chose. They could not speak enough English to ask for
advice, or even to make their most pressing wants known. One son, Fuchs
said, was well-grown, and strong enough to work the land; but the father
was old and frail and knew nothing about farming. He was a weaver by
trade; had been a skilled workman on tapestries and upholstery materials.
He had brought his fiddle with him, which would nâ€™t be of much use here,
though he used to pick up money by it at home.

â€œIf theyâ€™re nice people, I hate to think of them spending the winter in
that cave of Krajiekâ€™s,â€ said grandmother. â€œItâ€™s no better than a badger
hole; no proper dugout at all. And I hear heâ€™s made them pay twenty
dollars for his old cookstove that ainâ€™t worth ten.â€

â€œYesâ€™m,â€ said Otto; â€œand heâ€™s sold â€™em his oxen and his two bony old
horses for the price of good work-teams. Iâ€™d have interfered about the
horsesâ€”the old man can understand some Germanâ€”if Iâ€™d â€™aâ€™ thought it would
do any good. But Bohemians has a natural distrust of Austrians.â€

Grandmother looked interested. â€œNow, why is that, Otto ?â€

Fuchs wrinkled his brow and nose. â€œWell, maâ€™m, itâ€™s politics. It would
take me a long while to explain.â€

The land was growing rougher; I was told that we were approaching Squaw
Creek, which cut up the west half of the Shimerdasâ€™ place and made the
land of little value for farming. Soon we could see the broken, grassy
clay cliffs which indicated the windings of the stream, and the glittering
tops of the cottonwoods and ash trees that grew down in the ravine. Some
of the cottonwoods had already turned, and the yellow leaves and shining
white bark made them look like the gold and silver trees in fairy tales.

As we approached the Shimerdasâ€™ dwelling, I could still see nothing but
rough red hillocks, and draws with shelving banks and long roots hanging
out where the earth had crumbled away. Presently, against one of those
banks, I saw a sort of shed, thatched with the same wine-colored grass
that grew everywhere. Near it tilted a shattered windmill-frame, that had
no wheel. We drove up to this skeleton to tie our horses, and then I saw a
door and window sunk deep in the draw-bank. The door stood open, and a
woman and a girl of fourteen ran out and looked up at us hopefully. A
little girl trailed along behind them. The woman had on her head the same
embroidered shawl with silk fringes that she wore when she had alighted
from the train at Black Hawk. She was not old, but she was certainly not
young. Her face was alert and lively, with a sharp chin and shrewd little
eyes. She shook grandmotherâ€™s hand energetically.

â€œVery glad, very glad!â€ she ejaculated. Immediately she pointed to the
bank out of which she had emerged and said, â€œHouse no good, house no
good!â€

Grandmother nodded consolingly. â€œYouâ€™ll get fixed up comfortable after
while, Mrs. Shimerda; make good house.â€

My grandmother always spoke in a very loud tone to foreigners, as if they
were deaf. She made Mrs. Shimerda understand the friendly intention of our
visit, and the Bohemian woman handled the loaves of bread and even smelled
them, and examined the pies with lively curiosity, exclaiming, â€œMuch good,
much thank!â€â€”and again she wrung grandmotherâ€™s hand.

The oldest son, AmbroÅ¾,â€”they called it Ambrosch,â€”came out of the cave and
stood beside his mother. He was nineteen years old, short and
broad-backed, with a close-cropped, flat head, and a wide, flat face. His
hazel eyes were little and shrewd, like his motherâ€™s, but more sly and
suspicious; they fairly snapped at the food. The family had been living on
corncakes and sorghum molasses for three days.

The little girl was pretty, but Ãn-toniaâ€” they accented the name thus,
strongly, when they spoke to herâ€”was still prettier. I remembered what the
conductor had said about her eyes. They were big and warm and full of
light, like the sun shining on brown pools in the wood. Her skin was
brown, too, and in her cheeks she had a glow of rich, dark color. Her
brown hair was curly and wild-looking. The little sister, whom they called
Yulka (Julka), was fair, and seemed mild and obedient. While I stood
awkwardly confronting the two girls, Krajiek came up from the barn to see
what was going on. With him was another Shimerda son. Even from a distance
one could see that there was something strange about this boy. As he
approached us, he began to make uncouth noises, and held up his hands to
show us his fingers, which were webbed to the first knuckle, like a duckâ€™s
foot. When he saw me draw back, he began to crow delightedly, â€œHoo,
hoo-hoo, hoo-hoo!â€ like a rooster. His mother scowled and said sternly,
â€œMarek!â€ then spoke rapidly to Krajiek in Bohemian.

â€œShe wants me to tell you he wonâ€™t hurt nobody, Mrs. Burden. He was born
like that. The others are smart. Ambrosch, he make good farmer.â€ He struck
Ambrosch on the back, and the boy smiled knowingly.

At that moment the father came out of the hole in the bank. He wore no
hat, and his thick, iron-gray hair was brushed straight back from his
forehead. It was so long that it bushed out behind his ears, and made him
look like the old portraits I remembered in Virginia. He was tall and
slender, and his thin shoulders stooped. He looked at us understandingly,
then took grandmotherâ€™s hand and bent over it. I noticed how white and
well-shaped his own hands were. They looked calm, somehow, and skilled.
His eyes were melancholy, and were set back deep under his brow. His face
was ruggedly formed, but it looked like ashesâ€”like something from which
all the warmth and light had died out. Everything about this old man was
in keeping with his dignified manner. He was neatly dressed. Under his
coat he wore a knitted gray vest, and, instead of a collar, a silk scarf
of a dark bronze-green, carefully crossed and held together by a red coral
pin. While Krajiek was translating for Mr. Shimerda, Antonia came up to me
and held out her hand coaxingly. In a moment we were running up the steep
drawside together, Yulka trotting after us.

When we reached the level and could see the gold tree-tops, I pointed
toward them, and Antonia laughed and squeezed my hand as if to tell me how
glad she was I had come. We raced off toward Squaw Creek and did not stop
until the ground itself stoppedâ€”fell away before us so abruptly that the
next step would have been out into the tree-tops. We stood panting on the
edge of the ravine, looking down at the trees and bushes that grew below
us. The wind was so strong that I had to hold my hat on, and the girlsâ€™
skirts were blown out before them. Antonia seemed to like it; she held her
little sister by the hand and chattered away in that language which seemed
to me spoken so much more rapidly than mine. She looked at me, her eyes
fairly blazing with things she could not say.

â€œName ? What name ?â€ she asked, touching me on the shoulder. I told her my
name, and she repeated it after me and made Yulka say it. She pointed into
the gold cottonwood tree behind whose top we stood and said again, â€œWhat
name ?â€

We sat down and made a nest in the long red grass. Yulka curled up like a
baby rabbit and played with a grasshopper. Antonia pointed up to the sky
and questioned me with her glance. I gave her the word, but she was not
satisfied and pointed to my eyes. I told her, and she repeated the word,
making it sound like â€œice.â€ She pointed up to the sky, then to my eyes,
then back to the sky, with movements so quick and impulsive that she
distracted me, and I had no idea what she wanted. She got up on her knees
and wrung her hands. She pointed to her own eyes and shook her head, then
to mine and to the sky, nodding violently.

â€œOh,â€ I exclaimed, â€œblue; blue sky.â€

She clapped her hands and murmured, â€œBlue sky, blue eyes,â€ as if it amused
her. While we snuggled down there out of the wind she learned a score of
words. She was quick, and very eager. We were so deep in the grass that we
could see nothing but the blue sky over us and the gold tree in front of
us. It was wonderfully pleasant. After Antonia had said the new words over
and over, she wanted to give me a little chased silver ring she wore on
her middle finger. When she coaxed and insisted, I repulsed her quite
sternly. I did nâ€™t want her ring, and I felt there was something reckless
and extravagant about her wishing to give it away to a boy she had never
seen before. No wonder Krajiek got the better of these people, if this was
how they behaved.

While we were disputing about the ring, I heard a mournful voice calling,
â€œÃn-tonia, Ãn-tonia!â€ She sprang up like a hare. â€œTatinek, Tatinek!â€ she
shouted, and we ran to meet the old man who was coming toward us. Antonia
reached him first, took his hand and kissed it. When I came up, he touched
my shoulder and looked searchingly down into my face for several seconds.
I became somewhat embarrassed, for I was used to being taken for granted
by my elders.

We went with Mr. Shimerda back to the dugout, where grandmother was
waiting for me. Before I got into the wagon, he took a book out of his
pocket, opened it, and showed me a page with two alphabets, one English
and the other Bohemian. He placed this book in my grandmotherâ€™s hands,
looked at her entreatingly, and said with an earnestness which I shall
never forget, â€œTe-e-ach, te-e-ach my Ãn-tonia!â€




IV


ON the afternoon of that same Sunday I took my first long ride on my pony,
under Ottoâ€™s direction. After that Dude and I went twice a week to the
post-office, six miles east of us, and I saved the men a good deal of time
by riding on errands to our neighbors. When we had to borrow anything, or
to send about word that there would be preaching at the sod schoolhouse, I
was always the messenger. Formerly Fuchs attended to such things after
working hours.

All the years that have passed have not dimmed my memory of that first
glorious autumn. The new country lay open before me: there were no fences
in those days, and I could choose my own way over the grass uplands,
trusting the pony to get me home again. Sometimes I followed the
sunflower-bordered roads. Fuchs told me that the sunflowers were
introduced into that country by the Mormons; that at the time of the
persecution, when they left Missouri and struck out into the wilderness to
find a place where they could worship God in their own way, the members of
the first exploring party, crossing the plains to Utah, scattered
sunflower seed as they went. The next summer, when the long trains of
wagons came through with all the women and children, they had the
sunflower trail to follow. I believe that botanists do not confirm Jakeâ€™s
story, but insist that the sunflower was native to those plains.
Nevertheless, that legend has stuck in my mind, and sunflower-bordered
roads always seem to me the roads to freedom.

I used to love to drift along the pale yellow cornfields, looking for the
damp spots one sometimes found at their edges, where the smartweed soon
turned a rich copper color and the narrow brown leaves hung curled like
cocoons about the swollen joints of the stem. Sometimes I went south to
visit our German neighbors and to admire their catalpa grove, or to see
the big elm tree that grew up out of a deep crack in the earth and had a
hawkâ€™s nest in its branches. Trees were so rare in that country, and they
had to make such a hard fight to grow, that we used to feel anxious about
them, and visit them as if they were persons. It must have been the
scarcity of detail in that tawny landscape that made detail so precious.

Sometimes I rode north to the big prairie-dog town to watch the brown,
earth-owls fly home in the late afternoon and go down to their nests
underground with the dogs. Antonia Shimerda liked to go with me, and we
used to wonder a great deal about these birds of subterranean habit. We
had to be on our guard there, for rattlesnakes were always lurking about.
They came to pick up an easy living among the dogs and owls, which were
quite defenseless against them; took possession of their comfortable
houses and ate the eggs and puppies. We felt sorry for the owls. It was
always mournful to see them come flying home at sunset and disappear under
the earth. But, after all, we felt, winged things who would live like that
must be rather degraded creatures. The dog-town was a long way from any
pond or creek. Otto Fuchs said he had seen populous dog-towns in the
desert where there was no surface water for fifty miles; he insisted that
some of the holes must go down to waterâ€”nearly two hundred feet,
hereabouts. Antonia said she did nâ€™t believe it; that the dogs probably
lapped up the dew in the early morning, like the rabbits.

Antonia had opinions about everything, and she was soon able to make them
known. Almost every day she came running across the prairie to have her
reading lesson with me. Mrs. Shimerda grumbled, but realized it was
important that one member of the family should learn English. When the
lesson was over, we used to go up to the watermelon patch behind the
garden. I split the melons with an old corn-knife, and we lifted out the
hearts and ate them with the juice trickling through our fingers. The
white Christmas melons we did not touch, but we watched them with
curiosity. They were to be picked late, when the hard frosts had set in,
and put away for winter use. After weeks on the ocean, the Shimerdas were
famished for fruit. The two girls would wander for miles along the edge of
the cornfields, hunting for ground-cherries.

Antonia loved to help grandmother in the kitchen and to learn about
cooking and housekeeping. She would stand beside her, watching her every
movement. We were willing to believe that Mrs. Shimerda was a good
housewife in her own country, but she managed poorly under new conditions:
the conditions were bad enough, certainly!

I remember how horrified we were at the sour, ashy-gray bread she gave her
family to eat. She mixed her dough, we discovered, in an old tin
peck-measure that Krajiek had used about the barn. When she took the paste
out to bake it, she left smears of dough sticking to the sides of the
measure, put the measure on the shelf behind the stove, and let this
residue ferment. The next time she made bread, she scraped this sour stuff
down into the fresh dough to serve as yeast.

During those first months the Shimerdas never went to town. Krajiek
encouraged them in the belief that in Black Hawk they would somehow be
mysteriously separated from their money. They hated Krajiek, but they
clung to him because he was the only human being with whom they could talk
or from whom they could get information. He slept with the old man and the
two boys in the dugout barn, along with the oxen. They kept him in their
hole and fed him for the same reason that the prairie dogs and the brown
owls housed the rattlesnakesâ€”because they did not know how to get rid of
him.




V


WE knew that things were hard for our Bohemian neighbors, but the two
girls were light-hearted and never complained. They were always ready to
forget their troubles at home, and to run away with me over the prairie,
scaring rabbits or starting up flocks of quail.

I remember Antoniaâ€™s excitement when she came into our kitchen one
afternoon and announced: â€œMy papa find friends up north, with Russian
mans. Last night he take me for see, and I can understand very much talk.
Nice mans, Mrs. Burden. One is fat and all the time laugh. Everybody
laugh. The first time I see my papa laugh in this kawn-tree. Oh, very
nice!â€

I asked her if she meant the two Russians who lived up by the big
dog-town. I had often been tempted to go to see them when I was riding in
that direction, but one of them was a wild-looking fellow and I was a
little afraid of him. Russia seemed to me more remote than any other
countryâ€”farther away than China, almost as far as the North Pole. Of all
the strange, uprooted people among the first settlers, those two men were
the strangest and the most aloof. Their last names were unpronounceable,
so they were called Pavel and Peter. They went about making signs to
people, and until the Shimerdas came they had no friends. Krajiek could
understand them a little, but he had cheated them in a trade, so they
avoided him. Pavel, the tall one, was said to be an anarchist; since he
had no means of imparting his opinions, probably his wild gesticulations
and his generally excited and rebellious manner gave rise to this
supposition. He must once have been a very strong man, but now his great
frame, with big, knotty joints, had a wasted look, and the skin was drawn
tight over his high cheek-bones. His breathing was hoarse, and he always
had a cough.

Peter, his companion, was a very different sort of fellow; short,
bow-legged, and as fat as butter. He always seemed pleased when he met
people on the road, smiled and took off his cap to every one, men as well
as women. At a distance, on his wagon, he looked like an old man; his hair
and beard were of such a pale flaxen color that they seemed white in the
sun. They were as thick and curly as carded wool. His rosy face, with its
snub nose, set in this fleece, was like a melon among its leaves. He was
usually called â€œCurly Peter,â€ or â€œRooshian Peter.â€

The two Russians made good farmhands, and in summer they worked out
together. I had heard our neighbors laughing when they told how Peter
always had to go home at night to milk his cow. Other bachelor
homesteaders used canned milk, to save trouble. Sometimes Peter came to
church at the sod schoolhouse. It was there I first saw him, sitting on a
low bench by the door, his plush cap in his hands, his bare feet tucked
apologetically under the seat.

After Mr. Shimerda discovered the Russians, he went to see them almost
every evening, and sometimes took Antonia with him. She said they came
from a part of Russia where the language was not very different from
Bohemian, and if I wanted to go to their place, she could talk to them for
me. One afternoon, before the heavy frosts began, we rode up there
together on my pony.

The Russians had a neat log house built on a grassy slope, with a windlass
well beside the door. As we rode up the draw we skirted a big melon patch,
and a garden where squashes and yellow cucumbers lay about on the sod. We
found Peter out behind his kitchen, bending over a washtub. He was working
so hard that he did not hear us coming. His whole body moved up and down
as he rubbed, and he was a funny sight from the rear, with his shaggy head
and bandy legs. When he straightened himself up to greet us, drops of
perspiration were rolling from his thick nose down on to his curly beard.
Peter dried his hands and seemed glad to leave his washing. He took us
down to see his chickens, and his cow that was grazing on the hillside. He
told Antonia that in his country only rich people had cows, but here any
man could have one who would take care of her. The milk was good for
Pavel, who was often sick, and he could make butter by beating sour cream
with a wooden spoon. Peter was very fond of his cow. He patted her flanks
and talked to her in Russian while he pulled up her lariat pin and set it
in a new place.

After he had shown us his garden, Peter trundled a load of watermelons up
the hill in his wheelbarrow. Pavel was not at home. He was off somewhere
helping to dig a well. The house I thought very comfortable for two men
who were â€œbatching.â€ Besides the kitchen, there was a living-room, with a
wide double bed built against the wall, properly made up with blue gingham
sheets and pillows. There was a little storeroom, too, with a window,
where they kept guns and saddles and tools, and old coats and boots. That
day the floor was covered with garden things, drying for winter; corn and
beans and fat yellow cucumbers. There were no screens or window-blinds in
the house, and all the doors and windows stood wide open, letting in flies
and sunshine alike.

Peter put the melons in a row on the oilcloth-covered table and stood over
them, brandishing a butcher knife. Before the blade got fairly into them,
they split of their own ripeness, with a delicious sound. He gave us
knives, but no plates, and the top of the table was soon swimming with
juice and seeds. I had never seen any one eat so many melons as Peter ate.
He assured us that they were good for oneâ€”better than medicine; in his
country people lived on them at this time of year. He was very hospitable
and jolly. Once, while he was looking at Antonia, he sighed and told us
that if he had stayed at home in Russia perhaps by this time he would have
had a pretty daughter of his own to cook and keep house for him. He said
he had left his country because of a â€œgreat trouble.â€

When we got up to go, Peter looked about in perplexity for something that
would entertain us. He ran into the storeroom and brought out a gaudily
painted harmonica, sat down on a bench, and spreading his fat legs apart
began to play like a whole band. The tunes were either very lively or very
doleful, and he sang words to some of them.

Before we left, Peter put ripe cucumbers into a sack for Mrs. Shimerda and
gave us a lard-pail full of milk to cook them in. I had never heard of
cooking cucumbers, but Antonia assured me they were very good. We had to
walk the pony all the way home to keep from spilling the milk.




VI


ONE afternoon we were having our reading lesson on the warm, grassy bank
where the badger lived. It was a day of amber sunlight, but there was a
shiver of coming winter in the air. I had seen ice on the little
horse-pond that morning, and as we went through the garden we found the
tall asparagus, with its red berries, lying on the ground, a mass of slimy
green.

Tony was barefooted, and she shivered in her cotton dress and was
comfortable only when we were tucked down on the baked earth, in the full
blaze of the sun. She could talk to me about almost anything by this time.
That afternoon she was telling me how highly esteemed our friend the
badger was in her part of the world, and how men kept a special kind of
dog, with very short legs, to hunt him. Those dogs, she said, went down
into the hole after the badger and killed him there in a terrific struggle
underground; you could hear the barks and yelps outside. Then the dog
dragged himself back, covered with bites and scratches, to be rewarded and
petted by his master. She knew a dog who had a star on his collar for
every badger he had killed.

The rabbits were unusually spry that afternoon. They kept starting up all
about us, and dashing off down the draw as if they were playing a game of
some kind. But the little buzzing things that lived in the grass were all
deadâ€”all but one. While we were lying there against the warm bank, a
little insect of the palest, frailest green hopped painfully out of the
buffalo grass and tried to leap into a bunch of bluestem. He missed it,
fell back, and sat with his head sunk between his long legs, his antennÃ¦
quivering, as if he were waiting for something to come and finish him.
Tony made a warm nest for him in her hands; talked to him gayly and
indulgently in Bohemian. Presently he began to sing for usâ€”a thin, rusty
little chirp. She held him close to her ear and laughed, but a moment
afterward I saw there were tears in her eyes. She told me that in her
village at home there was an old beggar woman who went about selling herbs
and roots she had dug up in the forest. If you took her in and gave her a
warm place by the fire, she sang old songs to the children in a cracked
voice, like this. Old Hata, she was called, and the children loved to see
her coming and saved their cakes and sweets for her.

When the bank on the other side of the draw began to throw a narrow shelf
of shadow, we knew we ought to be starting homeward; the chill came on
quickly when the sun got low, and Antoniaâ€™s dress was thin. What were we
to do with the frail little creature we had lured back to life by false
pretenses ? I offered my pockets, but Tony shook her head and carefully put
the green insect in her hair, tying her big handkerchief down loosely over
her curls. I said I would go with her until we could see Squaw Creek, and
then turn and run home. We drifted along lazily, very happy, through the
magical light of the late afternoon.

All those fall afternoons were the same, but I never got used to them. As
far as we could see, the miles of copper-red grass were drenched in
sunlight that was stronger and fiercer than at any other time of the day.
The blond cornfields were red gold, the haystacks turned rosy and threw
long shadows. The whole prairie was like the bush that burned with fire
and was not consumed. That hour always had the exultation of victory, of
triumphant ending, like a heroâ€™s deathâ€”heroes who died young and
gloriously. It was a sudden transfiguration, a lifting-up of day.

How many an afternoon Antonia and I have trailed along the prairie under
that magnificence! And always two long black shadows flitted before us or
followed after, dark spots on the ruddy grass.

We had been silent a long time, and the edge of the sun sank nearer and
nearer the prairie floor, when we saw a figure moving on the edge of the
upland, a gun over his shoulder. He was walking slowly, dragging his feet
along as if he had no purpose. We broke into a run to overtake him.

â€œMy papa sick all the time,â€ Tony panted as we flew. â€œHe not look good,
Jim.â€

As we neared Mr. Shimerda she shouted, and he lifted his head and peered
about. Tony ran up to him, caught his hand and pressed it against her
cheek. She was the only one of his family who could rouse the old man from
the torpor in which he seemed to live. He took the bag from his belt and
showed us three rabbits he had shot, looked at Antonia with a wintry
flicker of a smile and began to tell her something. She turned to me.

â€œMy tatinek make me little hat with the skins, little hat for win-ter!â€
she exclaimed joyfully. â€œMeat for eat, skin for hat,â€â€”she told off these
benefits on her fingers.

Her father put his hand on her hair, but she caught his wrist and lifted
it carefully away, talking to him rapidly. I heard the name of old Hata.
He untied the handkerchief, separated her hair with his fingers, and stood
looking down at the green insect. When it began to chirp faintly, he
listened as if it were a beautiful sound.

I picked up the gun he had dropped; a queer piece from the old country,
short and heavy, with a stagâ€™s head on the cock. When he saw me examining
it, he turned to me with his far-away look that always made me feel as if
I were down at the bottom of a well. He spoke kindly and gravely, and
Antonia translated:â€”

â€œMy tatinek say when you are big boy, he give you his gun. Very fine, from
Bohemie. It was belong to a great man, very rich, like what you not got
here; many fields, many forests, many big house. My papa play for his
wedding, and he give my papa fine gun, and my papa give you.â€

[Illustration: Mr. Shimerda walking on the upland prairie with a gun over
                              his shoulder]

I was glad that this project was one of futurity. There never were such
people as the Shimerdas for wanting to give away everything they had. Even
the mother was always offering me things, though I knew she expected
substantial presents in return. We stood there in friendly silence, while
the feeble minstrel sheltered in Antoniaâ€™s hair went on with its scratchy
chirp. The old manâ€™s smile, as he listened, was so full of sadness, of
pity for things, that I never afterward forgot it. As the sun sank there
came a sudden coolness and the strong smell of earth and drying grass.
Antonia and her father went off hand in hand, and I buttoned up my jacket
and raced my shadow home.




VII


MUCH as I liked Antonia, I hated a superior tone that she sometimes took
with me. She was four years older than I, to be sure, and had seen more of
the world; but I was a boy and she was a girl, and I resented her
protecting manner. Before the autumn was over she began to treat me more
like an equal and to defer to me in other things than reading lessons.
This change came about from an adventure we had together.

One day when I rode over to the Shimerdasâ€™ I found Antonia starting off on
foot for Russian Peterâ€™s house, to borrow a spade Ambrosch needed. I
offered to take her on the pony, and she got up behind me. There had been
another black frost the night before, and the air was clear and heady as
wine. Within a week all the blooming roads had been despoiledâ€”hundreds of
miles of yellow sunflowers had been transformed into brown, rattling,
burry stalks.

We found Russian Peter digging his potatoes. We were glad to go in and get
warm by his kitchen stove and to see his squashes and Christmas melons,
heaped in the storeroom for winter. As we rode away with the spade,
Antonia suggested that we stop at the prairie-dog town and dig into one of
the holes. We could find out whether they ran straight down, or were
horizontal, like mole-holes; whether they had underground connections;
whether the owls had nests down there, lined with feathers. We might get
some puppies, or owl eggs, or snake-skins.

The dog-town was spread out over perhaps ten acres. The grass had been
nibbled short and even, so this stretch was not shaggy and red like the
surrounding country, but gray and velvety. The holes were several yards
apart, and were disposed with a good deal of regularity, almost as if the
town had been laid out in streets and avenues. One always felt that an
orderly and very sociable kind of life was going on there. I picketed Dude
down in a draw, and we went wandering about, looking for a hole that would
be easy to dig. The dogs were out, as usual, dozens of them, sitting up on
their hind legs over the doors of their houses. As we approached, they
barked, shook their tails at us, and scurried underground. Before the
mouths of the holes were little patches of sand and gravel, scratched up,
we supposed, from a long way below the surface. Here and there, in the
town, we came on larger gravel patches, several yards away from any hole.
If the dogs had scratched the sand up in excavating, how had they carried
it so far ? It was on one of these gravel beds that I met my adventure.

We were examining a big hole with two entrances. The burrow sloped into
the ground at a gentle angle, so that we could see where the two corridors
united, and the floor was dusty from use, like a little highway over which
much travel went. I was walking backward, in a crouching position, when I
heard Antonia scream. She was standing opposite me, pointing behind me and
shouting something in Bohemian. I whirled round, and there, on one of
those dry gravel beds, was the biggest snake I had ever seen. He was
sunning himself, after the cold night, and he must have been asleep when
Antonia screamed. When I turned he was lying in long loose waves, like a
letter â€œW.â€ He twitched and began to coil slowly. He was not merely a big
snake, I thoughtâ€”he was a circus monstrosity. His abominable muscularity,
his loathsome, fluid motion, somehow made me sick. He was as thick as my
leg, and looked as if millstones could nâ€™t crush the disgusting vitality
out of him. He lifted his hideous little head, and rattled. I did nâ€™t run
because I did nâ€™t think of itâ€”if my back had been against a stone wall I
could nâ€™t have felt more cornered. I saw his coils tightenâ€”now he would
spring, spring his length, I remembered. I ran up and drove at his head
with my spade, struck him fairly across the neck, and in a minute he was
all about my feet in wavy loops. I struck now from hate. Antonia,
barefooted as she was, ran up behind me. Even after I had pounded his ugly
head flat, his body kept on coiling and winding, doubling and falling back
on itself. I walked away and turned my back. I felt seasick. Antonia came
after me, crying, â€œO Jimmy, he not bite you ? You sure ? Why you not run
when I say ?â€

â€œWhat did you jabber Bohunk for ? You might have told me there was a snake
behind me!â€ I said petulantly.

â€œI know I am just awful, Jim, I was so scared.â€ She took my handkerchief
from my pocket and tried to wipe my face with it, but I snatched it away
from her. I suppose I looked as sick as I felt.

â€œI never know you was so brave, Jim,â€ she went on comfortingly. â€œYou is
just like big mans; you wait for him lift his head and then you go for
him. Ainâ€™t you feel scared a bit ? Now we take that snake home and show
everybody. Nobody ainâ€™t seen in this kawn-tree so big snake like you
kill.â€

She went on in this strain until I began to think that I had longed for
this opportunity, and had hailed it with joy. Cautiously we went back to
the snake; he was still groping with his tail, turning up his ugly belly
in the light. A faint, fetid smell came from him, and a thread of green
liquid oozed from his crushed head.

â€œLook, Tony, thatâ€™s his poison,â€ I said.

I took a long piece of string from my pocket, and she lifted his head with
the spade while I tied a noose around it. We pulled him out straight and
measured him by my riding-quirt; he was about five and a half feet long.
He had twelve rattles, but they were broken off before they began to
taper, so I insisted that he must once have had twenty-four. I explained
to Antonia how this meant that he was twenty-four years old, that he must
have been there when white men first came, left on from buffalo and Indian
times. As I turned him over I began to feel proud of him, to have a kind
of respect for his age and size. He seemed like the ancient, eldest Evil.
Certainly his kind have left horrible unconscious memories in all
warm-blooded life. When we dragged him down into the draw, Dude sprang off
to the end of his tether and shivered all overâ€”would nâ€™t let us come near
him.

We decided that Antonia should ride Dude home, and I would walk. As she
rode along slowly, her bare legs swinging against the ponyâ€™s sides, she
kept shouting back to me about how astonished everybody would be. I
followed with the spade over my shoulder, dragging my snake. Her
exultation was contagious. The great land had never looked to me so big
and free. If the red grass were full of rattlers, I was equal to them all.
Nevertheless, I stole furtive glances behind me now and then to see that
no avenging mate, older and bigger than my quarry, was racing up from the
rear.

The sun had set when we reached our garden and went down the draw toward
the house. Otto Fuchs was the first one we met. He was sitting on the edge
of the cattle-pond, having a quiet pipe before supper. Antonia called him
to come quick and look. He did not say anything for a minute, but
scratched his head and turned the snake over with his boot.

â€œWhere did you run onto that beauty, Jim ?â€

â€œUp at the dog-town,â€ I answered laconically.

â€œKill him yourself ? How come you to have a weepon ?â€

â€œWeâ€™d been up to Russian Peterâ€™s, to borrow a spade for Ambrosch.â€

Otto shook the ashes out of his pipe and squatted down to count the
rattles. â€œIt was just luck you had a tool,â€ he said cautiously. â€œGosh! I
would nâ€™t want to do any business with that fellow myself, unless I had a
fence-post along. Your grandmotherâ€™s snake-cane would nâ€™t more than tickle
him. He could stand right up and talk to you, he could. Did he fight
hard ?â€

Antonia broke in: â€œHe fight something awful! He is all over Jimmyâ€™s boots.
I scream for him to run, but he just hit and hit that snake like he was
crazy.â€

Otto winked at me. After Antonia rode on he said: â€œGot him in the head
first crack, did nâ€™t you ? That was just as well.â€

We hung him up to the windmill, and when I went down to the kitchen I
found Antonia standing in the middle of the floor, telling the story with
a great deal of color.

Subsequent experiences with rattlesnakes taught me that my first encounter
was fortunate in circumstance. My big rattler was old, and had led too
easy a life; there was not much fight in him. He had probably lived there
for years, with a fat prairie dog for breakfast whenever he felt like it,
a sheltered home, even an owl-feather bed, perhaps, and he had forgot that
the world does nâ€™t owe rattlers a living. A snake of his size, in fighting
trim, would be more than any boy could handle. So in reality it was a mock
adventure; the game was fixed for me by chance, as it probably was for
many a dragon-slayer. I had been adequately armed by Russian Peter; the
snake was old and lazy; and I had Antonia beside me, to appreciate and
admire.

That snake hung on our corral fence for several days; some of the
neighbors came to see it and agreed that it was the biggest rattler ever
killed in those parts. This was enough for Antonia. She liked me better
from that time on, and she never took a supercilious air with me again. I
had killed a big snakeâ€”I was now a big fellow.




VIII


WHILE the autumn color was growing pale on the grass and cornfields,
things went badly with our friends the Russians. Peter told his troubles
to Mr. Shimerda: he was unable to meet a note which fell due on the first
of November; had to pay an exorbitant bonus on renewing it, and to give a
mortgage on his pigs and horses and even his milk cow. His creditor was
Wick Cutter, the merciless Black Hawk money-lender, a man of evil name
throughout the county, of whom I shall have more to say later. Peter could
give no very clear account of his transactions with Cutter. He only knew
that he had first borrowed two hundred dollars, then another hundred, then
fiftyâ€”that each time a bonus was added to the principal, and the debt grew
faster than any crop he planted. Now everything was plastered with
mortgages.

Soon after Peter renewed his note, Pavel strained himself lifting timbers
for a new barn, and fell over among the shavings with such a gush of blood
from the lungs that his fellow-workmen thought he would die on the spot.
They hauled him home and put him into his bed, and there he lay, very ill
indeed. Misfortune seemed to settle like an evil bird on the roof of the
log house, and to flap its wings there, warning human beings away. The
Russians had such bad luck that people were afraid of them and liked to
put them out of mind.

One afternoon Antonia and her father came over to our house to get
buttermilk, and lingered, as they usually did, until the sun was low. Just
as they were leaving, Russian Peter drove up. Pavel was very bad, he said,
and wanted to talk to Mr. Shimerda and his daughter; he had come to fetch
them. When Antonia and her father got into the wagon, I entreated
grandmother to let me go with them: I would gladly go without my supper, I
would sleep in the Shimerdasâ€™ barn and run home in the morning. My plan
must have seemed very foolish to her, but she was often large-minded about
humoring the desires of other people. She asked Peter to wait a moment,
and when she came back from the kitchen she brought a bag of sandwiches
and doughnuts for us.

Mr. Shimerda and Peter were on the front seat; Antonia and I sat in the
straw behind and ate our lunch as we bumped along. After the sun sank, a
cold wind sprang up and moaned over the prairie. If this turn in the
weather had come sooner, I should not have got away. We burrowed down in
the straw and curled up close together, watching the angry red die out of
the west and the stars begin to shine in the clear, windy sky. Peter kept
sighing and groaning. Tony whispered to me that he was afraid Pavel would
never get well. We lay still and did not talk. Up there the stars grew
magnificently bright. Though we had come from such different parts of the
world, in both of us there was some dusky superstition that those shining
groups have their influence upon what is and what is not to be. Perhaps
Russian Peter, come from farther away than any of us, had brought from his
land, too, some such belief.

The little house on the hillside was so much the color of the night that
we could not see it as we came up the draw. The ruddy windows guided
usâ€”the light from the kitchen stove, for there was no lamp burning.

We entered softly. The man in the wide bed seemed to be asleep. Tony and I
sat down on the bench by the wall and leaned our arms on the table in
front of us. The firelight flickered on the hewn logs that supported the
thatch overhead. Pavel made a rasping sound when he breathed, and he kept
moaning. We waited. The wind shook the doors and windows impatiently, then
swept on again, singing through the big spaces. Each gust, as it bore
down, rattled the panes, and swelled off like the others. They made me
think of defeated armies, retreating; or of ghosts who were trying
desperately to get in for shelter, and then went moaning on. Presently, in
one of those sobbing intervals between the blasts, the coyotes tuned up
with their whining howl; one, two, three, then all togetherâ€”to tell us
that winter was coming. This sound brought an answer from the bed,â€”a long
complaining cry,â€”as if Pavel were having bad dreams or were waking to some
old misery. Peter listened, but did not stir. He was sitting on the floor
by the kitchen stove. The coyotes broke out again; yap, yap, yapâ€”then the
high whine. Pavel called for something and struggled up on his elbow.

â€œHe is scared of the wolves,â€ Antonia whispered to me. â€œIn his country
there are very many, and they eat men and women.â€ We slid closer together
along the bench.

I could not take my eyes off the man in the bed. His shirt was hanging
open, and his emaciated chest, covered with yellow bristle, rose and fell
horribly. He began to cough. Peter shuffled to his feet, caught up the
tea-kettle and mixed him some hot water and whiskey. The sharp smell of
spirits went through the room.

Pavel snatched the cup and drank, then made Peter give him the bottle and
slipped it under his pillow, grinning disagreeably, as if he had outwitted
some one. His eyes followed Peter about the room with a contemptuous,
unfriendly expression. It seemed to me that he despised him for being so
simple and docile.

Presently Pavel began to talk to Mr. Shimerda, scarcely above a whisper.
He was telling a long story, and as he went on, Antonia took my hand under
the table and held it tight. She leaned forward and strained her ears to
hear him. He grew more and more excited, and kept pointing all around his
bed, as if there were things there and he wanted Mr. Shimerda to see them.

â€œItâ€™s wolves, Jimmy,â€ Antonia whispered. â€œItâ€™s awful, what he says!â€

The sick man raged and shook his fist. He seemed to be cursing people who
had wronged him. Mr. Shimerda caught him by the shoulders, but could
hardly hold him in bed. At last he was shut off by a coughing fit which
fairly choked him. He pulled a cloth from under his pillow and held it to
his mouth. Quickly it was covered with bright red spotsâ€”I thought I had
never seen any blood so bright. When he lay down and turned his face to
the wall, all the rage had gone out of him. He lay patiently fighting for
breath, like a child with croup. Antoniaâ€™s father uncovered one of his
long bony legs and rubbed it rhythmically. From our bench we could see
what a hollow case his body was. His spine and shoulder-blades stood out
like the bones under the hide of a dead steer left in the fields. That
sharp backbone must have hurt him when he lay on it.

Gradually, relief came to all of us. Whatever it was, the worst was over.
Mr. Shimerda signed to us that Pavel was asleep. Without a word Peter got
up and lit his lantern. He was going out to get his team to drive us home.
Mr. Shimerda went with him. We sat and watched the long bowed back under
the blue sheet, scarcely daring to breathe.

On the way home, when we were lying in the straw, under the jolting and
rattling Antonia told me as much of the story as she could. What she did
not tell me then, she told later; we talked of nothing else for days
afterward.



When Pavel and Peter were young men, living at home in Russia, they were
asked to be groomsmen for a friend who was to marry the belle of another
village. It was in the dead of winter and the groomâ€™s party went over to
the wedding in sledges. Peter and Pavel drove in the groomâ€™s sledge, and
six sledges followed with all his relatives and friends.

After the ceremony at the church, the party went to a dinner given by the
parents of the bride. The dinner lasted all afternoon; then it became a
supper and continued far into the night. There was much dancing and
drinking. At midnight the parents of the bride said good-bye to her and
blessed her. The groom took her up in his arms and carried her out to his
sledge and tucked her under the blankets. He sprang in beside her, and
Pavel and Peter (our Pavel and Peter!) took the front seat. Pavel drove.
The party set out with singing and the jingle of sleigh-bells, the groomâ€™s
sledge going first. All the drivers were more or less the worse for
merry-making, and the groom was absorbed in his bride.

The wolves were bad that winter, and every one knew it, yet when they
heard the first wolf-cry, the drivers were not much alarmed. They had too
much good food and drink inside them. The first howls were taken up and
echoed and with quickening repetitions. The wolves were coming together.
There was no moon, but the starlight was clear on the snow. A black drove
came up over the hill behind the wedding party. The wolves ran like
streaks of shadow; they looked no bigger than dogs, but there were
hundreds of them.

Something happened to the hindmost sledge: the driver lost control,â€”he was
probably very drunk,â€”the horses left the road, the sledge was caught in a
clump of trees, and overturned. The occupants rolled out over the snow,
and the fleetest of the wolves sprang upon them. The shrieks that followed
made everybody sober. The drivers stood up and lashed their horses. The
groom had the best team and his sledge was lightestâ€”all the others carried
from six to a dozen people.

Another driver lost control. The screams of the horses were more terrible
to hear than the cries of the men and women. Nothing seemed to check the
wolves. It was hard to tell what was happening in the rear; the people who
were falling behind shrieked as piteously as those who were already lost.
The little bride hid her face on the groomâ€™s shoulder and sobbed. Pavel
sat still and watched his horses. The road was clear and white, and the
groomâ€™s three blacks went like the wind. It was only necessary to be calm
and to guide them carefully.

At length, as they breasted a long hill, Peter rose cautiously and looked
back. â€œThere are only three sledges left,â€ he whispered.

â€œAnd the wolves ?â€ Pavel asked.

â€œEnough! Enough for all of us.â€

Pavel reached the brow of the hill, but only two sledges followed him down
the other side. In that moment on the hilltop, they saw behind them a
whirling black group on the snow. Presently the groom screamed. He saw his
fatherâ€™s sledge overturned, with his mother and sisters. He sprang up as
if he meant to jump, but the girl shrieked and held him back. It was even
then too late. The black ground-shadows were already crowding over the
heap in the road, and one horse ran out across the fields, his harness
hanging to him, wolves at his heels. But the groomâ€™s movement had given
Pavel an idea.

They were within a few miles of their village now. The only sledge left
out of six was not very far behind them, and Pavelâ€™s middle horse was
failing. Beside a frozen pond something happened to the other sledge;
Peter saw it plainly. Three big wolves got abreast of the horses, and the
horses went crazy. They tried to jump over each other, got tangled up in
the harness, and overturned the sledge.

When the shrieking behind them died away, Pavel realized that he was alone
upon the familiar road. â€œThey still come ?â€ he asked Peter.

â€œYes.â€

â€œHow many ?â€

â€œTwenty, thirtyâ€”enough.â€

Now his middle horse was being almost dragged by the other two. Pavel gave
Peter the reins and stepped carefully into the back of the sledge. He
called to the groom that they must lightenâ€”and pointed to the bride. The
young man cursed him and held her tighter. Pavel tried to drag her away.
In the struggle, the groom rose. Pavel knocked him over the side of the
sledge and threw the girl after him. He said he never remembered exactly
how he did it, or what happened afterward. Peter, crouching in the front
seat, saw nothing. The first thing either of them noticed was a new sound
that broke into the clear air, louder than they had ever heard it
beforeâ€”the bell of the monastery of their own village, ringing for early
prayers.

Pavel and Peter drove into the village alone, and they had been alone ever
since. They were run out of their village. Pavelâ€™s own mother would not
look at him. They went away to strange towns, but when people learned
where they came from, they were always asked if they knew the two men who
had fed the bride to the wolves. Wherever they went, the story followed
them. It took them five years to save money enough to come to America.
They worked in Chicago, Des Moines, Fort Wayne, but they were always
unfortunate. When Pavelâ€™s health grew so bad, they decided to try farming.

Pavel died a few days after he unburdened his mind to Mr. Shimerda, and
was buried in the Norwegian graveyard. Peter sold off everything, and left
the countryâ€”went to be cook in a railway construction camp where gangs of
Russians were employed.

At his sale we bought Peterâ€™s wheelbarrow and some of his harness. During
the auction he went about with his head down, and never lifted his eyes.
He seemed not to care about anything. The Black Hawk money-lender who held
mortgages on Peterâ€™s live-stock was there, and he bought in the sale notes
at about fifty cents on the dollar. Every one said Peter kissed the cow
before she was led away by her new owner. I did not see him do it, but
this I know: after all his furniture and his cook-stove and pots and pans
had been hauled off by the purchasers, when his house was stripped and
bare, he sat down on the floor with his clasp-knife and ate all the melons
that he had put away for winter. When Mr. Shimerda and Krajiek drove up in
their wagon to take Peter to the train, they found him with a dripping
beard, surrounded by heaps of melon rinds.

The loss of his two friends had a depressing effect upon old Mr. Shimerda.
When he was out hunting, he used to go into the empty log house and sit
there, brooding. This cabin was his hermitage until the winter snows
penned him in his cave. For Antonia and me, the story of the wedding party
was never at an end. We did not tell Pavelâ€™s secret to any one, but
guarded it jealouslyâ€”as if the wolves of the Ukraine had gathered that
night long ago, and the wedding party been sacrificed, to give us a
painful and peculiar pleasure. At night, before I went to sleep, I often
found myself in a sledge drawn by three horses, dashing through a country
that looked something like Nebraska and something like Virginia.




IX


THE first snowfall came early in December. I remember how the world looked
from our sitting-room window as I dressed behind the stove that morning:
the low sky was like a sheet of metal; the blond cornfields had faded out
into ghostliness at last; the little pond was frozen under its stiff
willow bushes. Big white flakes were whirling over everything and
disappearing in the red grass.

Beyond the pond, on the slope that climbed to the cornfield, there was,
faintly marked in the grass, a great circle where the Indians used to
ride. Jake and Otto were sure that when they galloped round that ring the
Indians tortured prisoners, bound to a stake in the center; but
grandfather thought they merely ran races or trained horses there.
Whenever one looked at this slope against the setting sun, the circle
showed like a pattern in the grass; and this morning, when the first light
spray of snow lay over it, it came out with wonderful distinctness, like
strokes of Chinese white on canvas. The old figure stirred me as it had
never done before and seemed a good omen for the winter.

As soon as the snow had packed hard I began to drive about the country in
a clumsy sleigh that Otto Fuchs made for me by fastening a wooden
goods-box on bobs. Fuchs had been apprenticed to a cabinet-maker in the
old country and was very handy with tools. He would have done a better job
if I had nâ€™t hurried him. My first trip was to the post-office, and the
next day I went over to take Yulka and Antonia for a sleigh-ride.

It was a bright, cold day. I piled straw and buffalo robes into the box,
and took two hot bricks wrapped in old blankets. When I got to the
Shimerdasâ€™ I did not go up to the house, but sat in my sleigh at the
bottom of the draw and called. Antonia and Yulka came running out, wearing
little rabbit-skin hats their father had made for them. They had heard
about my sledge from Ambrosch and knew why I had come. They tumbled in
beside me and we set off toward the north, along a road that happened to
be broken.

The sky was brilliantly blue, and the sunlight on the glittering white
stretches of prairie was almost blinding. As Antonia said, the whole world
was changed by the snow; we kept looking in vain for familiar landmarks.
The deep arroyo through which Squaw Creek wound was now only a cleft
between snow-driftsâ€”very blue when one looked down into it. The tree-tops
that had been gold all the autumn were dwarfed and twisted, as if they
would never have any life in them again. The few little cedars, which were
so dull and dingy before, now stood out a strong, dusky green. The wind
had the burning taste of fresh snow; my throat and nostrils smarted as if
some one had opened a hartshorn bottle. The cold stung, and at the same
time delighted one. My horseâ€™s breath rose like steam, and whenever we
stopped he smoked all over. The cornfields got back a little of their
color under the dazzling light, and stood the palest possible gold in the
sun and snow. All about us the snow was crusted in shallow terraces, with
tracings like ripple-marks at the edges, curly waves that were the actual
impression of the stinging lash in the wind.

The girls had on cotton dresses under their shawls; they kept shivering
beneath the buffalo robes and hugging each other for warmth. But they were
so glad to get away from their ugly cave and their motherâ€™s scolding that
they begged me to go on and on, as far as Russian Peterâ€™s house. The great
fresh open, after the stupefying warmth indoors, made them behave like
wild things. They laughed and shouted, and said they never wanted to go
home again. Could nâ€™t we settle down and live in Russian Peterâ€™s house,
Yulka asked, and could nâ€™t I go to town and buy things for us to keep
house with ?

All the way to Russian Peterâ€™s we were extravagantly happy, but when we
turned back,â€”it must have been about four oâ€™clock,â€”the east wind grew
stronger and began to howl; the sun lost its heartening power and the sky
became gray and somber. I took off my long woolen comforter and wound it
around Yulkaâ€™s throat. She got so cold that we made her hide her head
under the buffalo robe. Antonia and I sat erect, but I held the reins
clumsily, and my eyes were blinded by the wind a good deal of the time. It
was growing dark when we got to their house, but I refused to go in with
them and get warm. I knew my hands would ache terribly if I went near a
fire. Yulka forgot to give me back my comforter, and I had to drive home
directly against the wind. The next day I came down with an attack of
quinsy, which kept me in the house for nearly two weeks.

The basement kitchen seemed heavenly safe and warm in those daysâ€”like a
tight little boat in a winter sea. The men were out in the fields all day,
husking corn, and when they came in at noon, with long caps pulled down
over their ears and their feet in red-lined overshoes, I used to think
they were like Arctic explorers.

In the afternoons, when grandmother sat upstairs darning, or making
husking-gloves, I read â€œThe Swiss Family Robinsonâ€ aloud to her, and I
felt that the Swiss family had no advantages over us in the way of an
adventurous life. I was convinced that manâ€™s strongest antagonist is the
cold. I admired the cheerful zest with which grandmother went about
keeping us warm and comfortable and well-fed. She often reminded me, when
she was preparing for the return of the hungry men, that this country was
not like Virginia, and that here a cook had, as she said, â€œvery little to
do with.â€ On Sundays she gave us as much chicken as we could eat, and on
other days we had ham or bacon or sausage meat. She baked either pies or
cake for us every day, unless, for a change, she made my favorite pudding,
striped with currants and boiled in a bag.

Next to getting warm and keeping warm, dinner and supper were the most
interesting things we had to think about. Our lives centered around warmth
and food and the return of the men at nightfall. I used to wonder, when
they came in tired from the fields, their feet numb and their hands
cracked and sore, how they could do all the chores so conscientiously:
feed and water and bed the horses, milk the cows, and look after the pigs.
When supper was over, it took them a long while to get the cold out of
their bones. While grandmother and I washed the dishes and grandfather
read his paper upstairs, Jake and Otto sat on the long bench behind the
stove, â€œeasingâ€ their inside boots, or rubbing mutton tallow into their
cracked hands.

Every Saturday night we popped corn or made taffy, and Otto Fuchs used to
sing, â€œFor I Am a Cowboy and Know Iâ€™ve Done Wrong,â€ or, â€œBury Me Not on
the Lone Prairee.â€ He had a good baritone voice and always led the singing
when we went to church services at the sod schoolhouse.

I can still see those two men sitting on the bench; Ottoâ€™s close-clipped
head and Jakeâ€™s shaggy hair slicked flat in front by a wet comb. I can see
the sag of their tired shoulders against the whitewashed wall. What good
fellows they were, how much they knew, and how many things they had kept
faith with!

Fuchs had been a cowboy, a stage-driver, a bar-tender, a miner; had
wandered all over that great Western country and done hard work
everywhere, though, as grandmother said, he had nothing to show for it.
Jake was duller than Otto. He could scarcely read, wrote even his name
with difficulty, and he had a violent temper which sometimes made him
behave like a crazy manâ€”tore him all to pieces and actually made him ill.
But he was so soft-hearted that any one could impose upon him. If he, as
he said, â€œforgot himselfâ€ and swore before grandmother, he went about
depressed and shamefaced all day. They were both of them jovial about the
cold in winter and the heat in summer, always ready to work overtime and
to meet emergencies. It was a matter of pride with them not to spare
themselves. Yet they were the sort of men who never get on, somehow, or do
anything but work hard for a dollar or two a day.

On those bitter, starlit nights, as we sat around the old stove that fed
us and warmed us and kept us cheerful, we could hear the coyotes howling
down by the corrals, and their hungry, wintry cry used to remind the boys
of wonderful animal stories; about gray wolves and bears in the Rockies,
wildcats and panthers in the Virginia mountains. Sometimes Fuchs could be
persuaded to talk about the outlaws and desperate characters he had known.
I remember one funny story about himself that made grandmother, who was
working her bread on the bread-board, laugh until she wiped her eyes with
her bare arm, her hands being floury. It was like this:â€”

When Otto left Austria to come to America, he was asked by one of his
relatives to look after a woman who was crossing on the same boat, to join
her husband in Chicago. The woman started off with two children, but it
was clear that her family might grow larger on the journey. Fuchs said he
â€œgot on fine with the kids,â€ and liked the mother, though she played a
sorry trick on him. In mid-ocean she proceeded to have not one baby, but
three! This event made Fuchs the object of undeserved notoriety, since he
was traveling with her. The steerage stewardess was indignant with him,
the doctor regarded him with suspicion. The first-cabin passengers, who
made up a purse for the woman, took an embarrassing interest in Otto, and
often inquired of him about his charge. When the triplets were taken
ashore at New York, he had, as he said, â€œto carry some of them.â€ The trip
to Chicago was even worse than the ocean voyage. On the train it was very
difficult to get milk for the babies and to keep their bottles clean. The
mother did her best, but no woman, out of her natural resources, could
feed three babies. The husband, in Chicago, was working in a furniture
factory for modest wages, and when he met his family at the station he was
rather crushed by the size of it. He, too, seemed to consider Fuchs in
some fashion to blame. â€œI was sure glad,â€ Otto concluded, â€œthat he did nâ€™t
take his hard feeling out on that poor woman; but he had a sullen eye for
me, all right! Now, did you ever hear of a young fellerâ€™s having such hard
luck, Mrs. Burden ?â€

Grandmother told him she was sure the Lord had remembered these things to
his credit, and had helped him out of many a scrape when he did nâ€™t
realize that he was being protected by Providence.




X


FOR several weeks after my sleigh-ride, we heard nothing from the
Shimerdas. My sore throat kept me indoors, and grandmother had a cold
which made the housework heavy for her. When Sunday came she was glad to
have a day of rest. One night at supper Fuchs told us he had seen Mr.
Shimerda out hunting.

â€œHeâ€™s made himself a rabbit-skin cap, Jim, and a rabbit-skin collar that
he buttons on outside his coat. They ainâ€™t got but one overcoat among â€™em
over there, and they take turns wearing it. They seem awful scared of
cold, and stick in that hole in the bank like badgers.â€

â€œAll but the crazy boy,â€ Jake put in. â€œHe never wears the coat. Krajiek
says heâ€™s turrible strong and can stand anything. I guess rabbits must be
getting scarce in this locality. Ambrosch come along by the cornfield
yesterday where I was at work and showed me three prairie dogs heâ€™d shot.
He asked me if they was good to eat. I spit and made a face and took on,
to scare him, but he just looked like he was smarterâ€™n me and put â€™em back
in his sack and walked off.â€

Grandmother looked up in alarm and spoke to grandfather. â€œJosiah, you
donâ€™t suppose Krajiek would let them poor creatures eat prairie dogs, do
you ?â€

â€œYou had better go over and see our neighbors to-morrow, Emmaline,â€ he
replied gravely.

Fuchs put in a cheerful word and said prairie dogs were clean beasts and
ought to be good for food, but their family connections were against them.
I asked what he meant, and he grinned and said they belonged to the rat
family.

When I went downstairs in the morning, I found grandmother and Jake
packing a hamper basket in the kitchen.

â€œNow, Jake,â€ grandmother was saying, â€œif you can find that old rooster
that got his comb froze, just give his neck a twist, and weâ€™ll take him
along. Thereâ€™s no good reason why Mrs. Shimerda could nâ€™t have got hens
from her neighbors last fall and had a henhouse going by now. I reckon she
was confused and did nâ€™t know where to begin. Iâ€™ve come strange to a new
country myself, but I never forgot hens are a good thing to have, no
matter what you donâ€™t have.â€

â€œJust as you say, mam,â€ said Jake, â€œbut I hate to think of Krajiek getting
a leg of that old rooster.â€ He tramped out through the long cellar and
dropped the heavy door behind him.

After breakfast grandmother and Jake and I bundled ourselves up and
climbed into the cold front wagon-seat. As we approached the Shimerdasâ€™ we
heard the frosty whine of the pump and saw Antonia, her head tied up and
her cotton dress blown about her, throwing all her weight on the
pump-handle as it went up and down. She heard our wagon, looked back over
her shoulder, and catching up her pail of water, started at a run for the
hole in the bank.

Jake helped grandmother to the ground, saying he would bring the
provisions after he had blanketed his horses. We went slowly up the icy
path toward the door sunk in the drawside. Blue puffs of smoke came from
the stovepipe that stuck out through the grass and snow, but the wind
whisked them roughly away.

Mrs. Shimerda opened the door before we knocked and seized grandmotherâ€™s
hand. She did not say â€œHow do!â€ as usual, but at once began to cry,
talking very fast in her own language, pointing to her feet which were
tied up in rags, and looking about accusingly at every one.

The old man was sitting on a stump behind the stove, crouching over as if
he were trying to hide from us. Yulka was on the floor at his feet, her
kitten in her lap. She peeped out at me and smiled, but, glancing up at
her mother, hid again. Antonia was washing pans and dishes in a dark
corner. The crazy boy lay under the only window, stretched on a gunnysack
stuffed with straw. As soon as we entered he threw a grainsack over the
crack at the bottom of the door. The air in the cave was stifling, and it
was very dark, too. A lighted lantern, hung over the stove, threw out a
feeble yellow glimmer.

Mrs. Shimerda snatched off the covers of two barrels behind the door, and
made us look into them. In one there were some potatoes that had been
frozen and were rotting, in the other was a little pile of flour.
Grandmother murmured something in embarrassment, but the Bohemian woman
laughed scornfully, a kind of whinny-laugh, and catching up an empty
coffee-pot from the shelf, shook it at us with a look positively
vindictive.

Grandmother went on talking in her polite Virginia way, not admitting
their stark need or her own remissness, until Jake arrived with the
hamper, as if in direct answer to Mrs. Shimerdaâ€™s reproaches. Then the
poor woman broke down. She dropped on the floor beside her crazy son, hid
her face on her knees, and sat crying bitterly. Grandmother paid no heed
to her, but called Antonia to come and help empty the basket. Tony left
her corner reluctantly. I had never seen her crushed like this before.

â€œYou not mind my poor mamenka, Mrs. Burden. She is so sad,â€ she whispered,
as she wiped her wet hands on her skirt and took the things grandmother
handed her.

The crazy boy, seeing the food, began to make soft, gurgling noises and
stroked his stomach. Jake came in again, this time with a sack of
potatoes. Grandmother looked about in perplexity.

â€œHave nâ€™t you got any sort of cave or cellar outside, Antonia ? This is no
place to keep vegetables. How did your potatoes get frozen ?â€

â€œWe get from Mr. Bushy, at the post-office,â€”what he throw out. We got no
potatoes, Mrs. Burden,â€ Tony admitted mournfully.

When Jake went out, Marek crawled along the floor and stuffed up the
door-crack again. Then, quietly as a shadow, Mr. Shimerda came out from
behind the stove. He stood brushing his hand over his smooth gray hair, as
if he were trying to clear away a fog about his head. He was clean and
neat as usual, with his green neckcloth and his coral pin. He took
grandmotherâ€™s arm and led her behind the stove, to the back of the room.
In the rear wall was another little cave; a round hole, not much bigger
than an oil barrel, scooped out in the black earth. When I got up on one
of the stools and peered into it, I saw some quilts and a pile of straw.
The old man held the lantern. â€œYulka,â€ he said in a low, despairing voice,
â€œYulka; my Antonia!â€

Grandmother drew back. â€œYou mean they sleep in there,â€”your girls ?â€ He
bowed his head.

Tony slipped under his arm. â€œIt is very cold on the floor, and this is
warm like the badger hole. I like for sleep there,â€ she insisted eagerly.
â€œMy mamenka have nice bed, with pillows from our own geese in Bohemie.
See, Jim ?â€ She pointed to the narrow bunk which Krajiek had built against
the wall for himself before the Shimerdas came.

Grandmother sighed. â€œSure enough, where _would_ you sleep, dear! I donâ€™t
doubt youâ€™re warm there. Youâ€™ll have a better house after while, Antonia,
and then youâ€™ll forget these hard times.â€

Mr. Shimerda made grandmother sit down on the only chair and pointed his
wife to a stool beside her. Standing before them with his hand on
Antoniaâ€™s shoulder, he talked in a low tone, and his daughter translated.
He wanted us to know that they were not beggars in the old country; he
made good wages, and his family were respected there. He left Bohemia with
more than a thousand dollars in savings, after their passage money was
paid. He had in some way lost on exchange in New York, and the railway
fare to Nebraska was more than they had expected. By the time they paid
Krajiek for the land, and bought his horses and oxen and some old farm
machinery, they had very little money left. He wished grandmother to know,
however, that he still had some money. If they could get through until
spring came, they would buy a cow and chickens and plant a garden, and
would then do very well. Ambrosch and Antonia were both old enough to work
in the fields, and they were willing to work. But the snow and the bitter
weather had disheartened them all.

Antonia explained that her father meant to build a new house for them in
the spring; he and Ambrosch had already split the logs for it, but the
logs were all buried in the snow, along the creek where they had been
felled.

While grandmother encouraged and gave them advice, I sat down on the floor
with Yulka and let her show me her kitten. Marek slid cautiously toward us
and began to exhibit his webbed fingers. I knew he wanted to make his
queer noises for meâ€”to bark like a dog or whinny like a horse,â€”but he did
not dare in the presence of his elders. Marek was always trying to be
agreeable, poor fellow, as if he had it on his mind that he must make up
for his deficiencies.

Mrs. Shimerda grew more calm and reasonable before our visit was over,
and, while Antonia translated, put in a word now and then on her own
account. The woman had a quick ear, and caught up phrases whenever she
heard English spoken. As we rose to go, she opened her wooden chest and
brought out a bag made of bed-ticking, about as long as a flour sack and
half as wide, stuffed full of something. At sight of it, the crazy boy
began to smack his lips. When Mrs. Shimerda opened the bag and stirred the
contents with her hand, it gave out a salty, earthy smell, very pungent,
even among the other odors of that cave. She measured a teacup full, tied
it up in a bit of sacking, and presented it ceremoniously to grandmother.

â€œFor cook,â€ she announced. â€œLittle now; be very much when cook,â€ spreading
out her hands as if to indicate that the pint would swell to a gallon.
â€œVery good. You no have in this country. All things for eat better in my
country.â€

â€œMaybe so, Mrs. Shimerda,â€ grandmother said drily. â€œI canâ€™t say but I
prefer our bread to yours, myself.â€

  [Illustration: Mrs. Shimerda gathering mushrooms in a Bohemian forest]

Antonia undertook to explain. â€œThis very good, Mrs. Burden,â€â€”she clasped
her hands as if she could not express how good,â€”â€œit make very much when
you cook, like what my mama say. Cook with rabbit, cook with chicken, in
the gravy,â€”oh, so good!â€

All the way home grandmother and Jake talked about how easily good
Christian people could forget they were their brothersâ€™ keepers.

â€œI will say, Jake, some of our brothers and sisters are hard to keep.
Whereâ€™s a body to begin, with these people ? Theyâ€™re wanting in everything,
and most of all in horse-sense. Nobody can give â€™em that, I guess. Jimmy,
here, is about as able to take over a homestead as they are. Do you reckon
that boy Ambrosch has any real push in him ?â€

â€œHeâ€™s a worker, all right, mam, and heâ€™s got some ketch-on about him; but
heâ€™s a mean one. Folks can be mean enough to get on in this world; and
then, agâ€™in, they can be too mean.â€

That night, while grandmother was getting supper, we opened the package
Mrs. Shimerda had given her. It was full of little brown chips that looked
like the shavings of some root. They were as light as feathers, and the
most noticeable thing about them was their penetrating, earthy odor. We
could not determine whether they were animal or vegetable.

â€œThey might be dried meat from some queer beast, Jim. They ainâ€™t dried
fish, and they never grew on stalk or vine. Iâ€™m afraid of â€™em. Anyhow, I
should nâ€™t want to eat anything that had been shut up for months with old
clothes and goose pillows.â€

She threw the package into the stove, but I bit off a corner of one of the
chips I held in my hand, and chewed it tentatively. I never forgot the
strange taste; though it was many years before I knew that those little
brown shavings, which the Shimerdas had brought so far and treasured so
jealously, were dried mushrooms. They had been gathered, probably, in some
deep Bohemian forest â€¦




XI


DURING the week before Christmas, Jake was the most important person of
our household, for he was to go to town and do all our Christmas shopping.
But on the 21st of December, the snow began to fall. The flakes came down
so thickly that from the sitting-room windows I could not see beyond the
windmillâ€”its frame looked dim and gray, unsubstantial like a shadow. The
snow did not stop falling all day, or during the night that followed. The
cold was not severe, but the storm was quiet and resistless. The men could
not go farther than the barns and corral. They sat about the house most of
the day as if it were Sunday; greasing their boots, mending their
suspenders, plaiting whiplashes.

On the morning of the 22d, grandfather announced at breakfast that it
would be impossible to go to Black Hawk for Christmas purchases. Jake was
sure he could get through on horseback, and bring home our things in
saddle-bags; but grandfather told him the roads would be obliterated, and
a newcomer in the country would be lost ten times over. Anyway, he would
never allow one of his horses to be put to such a strain.

We decided to have a country Christmas, without any help from town. I had
wanted to get some picture-books for Yulka and Antonia; even Yulka was
able to read a little now. Grandmother took me into the ice-cold
storeroom, where she had some bolts of gingham and sheeting. She cut
squares of cotton cloth and we sewed them together into a book. We bound
it between pasteboards, which I covered with brilliant calico,
representing scenes from a circus. For two days I sat at the dining-room
table, pasting this book full of pictures for Yulka. We had files of those
good old family magazines which used to publish colored lithographs of
popular paintings, and I was allowed to use some of these. I took
â€œNapoleon Announcing the Divorce to Josephineâ€ for my frontispiece. On the
white pages I grouped Sunday-School cards and advertising cards which I
had brought from my â€œold country.â€ Fuchs got out the old candle-moulds and
made tallow candles. Grandmother hunted up her fancy cake-cutters and
baked gingerbread men and roosters, which we decorated with burnt sugar
and red cinnamon drops.

On the day before Christmas, Jake packed the things we were sending to the
Shimerdas in his saddle-bags and set off on grandfatherâ€™s gray gelding.
When he mounted his horse at the door, I saw that he had a hatchet slung
to his belt, and he gave grandmother a meaning look which told me he was
planning a surprise for me. That afternoon I watched long and eagerly from
the sitting-room window. At last I saw a dark spot moving on the west
hill, beside the half-buried cornfield, where the sky was taking on a
coppery flush from the sun that did not quite break through. I put on my
cap and ran out to meet Jake. When I got to the pond I could see that he
was bringing in a little cedar tree across his pommel. He used to help my
father cut Christmas trees for me in Virginia, and he had not forgotten
how much I liked them.

By the time we had placed the cold, fresh-smelling little tree in a corner
of the sitting-room, it was already Christmas Eve. After supper we all
gathered there, and even grandfather, reading his paper by the table,
looked up with friendly interest now and then. The cedar was about five
feet high and very shapely. We hung it with the gingerbread animals,
strings of popcorn, and bits of candle which Fuchs had fitted into
pasteboard sockets. Its real splendors, however, came from the most
unlikely place in the worldâ€”from Ottoâ€™s cowboy trunk. I had never seen
anything in that trunk but old boots and spurs and pistols, and a
fascinating mixture of yellow leather thongs, cartridges, and shoemakerâ€™s
wax. From under the lining he now produced a collection of brilliantly
colored paper figures, several inches high and stiff enough to stand
alone. They had been sent to him year after year, by his old mother in
Austria. There was a bleeding heart, in tufts of paper lace; there were
the three kings, gorgeously appareled, and the ox and the ass and the
shepherds; there was the Baby in the manger, and a group of angels,
singing; there were camels and leopards, held by the black slaves of the
three kings. Our tree became the talking tree of the fairy tale; legends
and stories nestled like birds in its branches. Grandmother said it
reminded her of the Tree of Knowledge. We put sheets of cotton wool under
it for a snow-field, and Jakeâ€™s pocket-mirror for a frozen lake.

I can see them now, exactly as they looked, working about the table in the
lamplight: Jake with his heavy features, so rudely moulded that his face
seemed, somehow, unfinished; Otto with his half-ear and the savage scar
that made his upper lip curl so ferociously under his twisted mustache. As
I remember them, what unprotected faces they were; their very roughness
and violence made them defenseless. These boys had no practiced manner
behind which they could retreat and hold people at a distance. They had
only their hard fists to batter at the world with. Otto was already one of
those drifting, case-hardened laborers who never marry or have children of
their own. Yet he was so fond of children!




XII


ON Christmas morning, when I got down to the kitchen, the men were just
coming in from their morning choresâ€”the horses and pigs always had their
breakfast before we did. Jake and Otto shouted â€œMerry Christmasâ€! to me,
and winked at each other when they saw the waffle-irons on the stove.
Grandfather came down, wearing a white shirt and his Sunday coat. Morning
prayers were longer than usual. He read the chapters from St. Matthew
about the birth of Christ, and as we listened it all seemed like something
that had happened lately, and near at hand. In his prayer he thanked the
Lord for the first Christmas, and for all that it had meant to the world
ever since. He gave thanks for our food and comfort, and prayed for the
poor and destitute in great cities, where the struggle for life was harder
than it was here with us. Grandfatherâ€™s prayers were often very
interesting. He had the gift of simple and moving expression. Because he
talked so little, his words had a peculiar force; they were not worn dull
from constant use. His prayers reflected what he was thinking about at the
time, and it was chiefly through them that we got to know his feelings and
his views about things.

After we sat down to our waffles and sausage, Jake told us how pleased the
Shimerdas had been with their presents; even Ambrosch was friendly and
went to the creek with him to cut the Christmas tree. It was a soft gray
day outside, with heavy clouds working across the sky, and occasional
squalls of snow. There were always odd jobs to be done about the barn on
holidays, and the men were busy until afternoon. Then Jake and I played
dominoes, while Otto wrote a long letter home to his mother. He always
wrote to her on Christmas Day, he said, no matter where he was, and no
matter how long it had been since his last letter. All afternoon he sat in
the dining-room. He would write for a while, then sit idle, his clenched
fist lying on the table, his eyes following the pattern of the oilcloth.
He spoke and wrote his own language so seldom that it came to him
awkwardly. His effort to remember entirely absorbed him.

At about four oâ€™clock a visitor appeared: Mr. Shimerda, wearing his
rabbit-skin cap and collar, and new mittens his wife had knitted. He had
come to thank us for the presents, and for all grandmotherâ€™s kindness to
his family. Jake and Otto joined us from the basement and we sat about the
stove, enjoying the deepening gray of the winter afternoon and the
atmosphere of comfort and security in my grandfatherâ€™s house. This feeling
seemed completely to take possession of Mr. Shimerda. I suppose, in the
crowded clutter of their cave, the old man had come to believe that peace
and order had vanished from the earth, or existed only in the old world he
had left so far behind. He sat still and passive, his head resting against
the back of the wooden rocking-chair, his hands relaxed upon the arms. His
face had a look of weariness and pleasure, like that of sick people when
they feel relief from pain. Grandmother insisted on his drinking a glass
of Virginia apple-brandy after his long walk in the cold, and when a faint
flush came up in his cheeks, his features might have been cut out of a
shell, they were so transparent. He said almost nothing, and smiled
rarely; but as he rested there we all had a sense of his utter content.

           [Illustration: Jake bringing home a Christmas tree]

As it grew dark, I asked whether I might light the Christmas tree before
the lamp was brought. When the candle ends sent up their conical yellow
flames, all the colored figures from Austria stood out clear and full of
meaning against the green boughs. Mr. Shimerda rose, crossed himself, and
quietly knelt down before the tree, his head sunk forward. His long body
formed a letter â€œS.â€ I saw grandmother look apprehensively at grandfather.
He was rather narrow in religious matters, and sometimes spoke out and
hurt peopleâ€™s feelings. There had been nothing strange about the tree
before, but now, with some one kneeling before it,â€”images, candles, â€¦
Grandfather merely put his finger-tips to his brow and bowed his venerable
head, thus Protestantizing the atmosphere.

We persuaded our guest to stay for supper with us. He needed little
urging. As we sat down to the table, it occurred to me that he liked to
look at us, and that our faces were open books to him. When his
deep-seeing eyes rested on me, I felt as if he were looking far ahead into
the future for me, down the road I would have to travel.

At nine oâ€™clock Mr. Shimerda lighted one of our lanterns and put on his
overcoat and fur collar. He stood in the little entry hall, the lantern
and his fur cap under his arm, shaking hands with us. When he took
grandmotherâ€™s hand, he bent over it as he always did, and said slowly,
â€œGood wo-man!â€ He made the sign of the cross over me, put on his cap and
went off in the dark. As we turned back to the sitting-room, grandfather
looked at me searchingly. â€œThe prayers of all good people are good,â€ he
said quietly.




XIII


THE week following Christmas brought in a thaw, and by New Yearâ€™s Day all
the world about us was a broth of gray slush, and the guttered slope
between the windmill and the barn was running black water. The soft black
earth stood out in patches along the roadsides. I resumed all my chores,
carried in the cobs and wood and water, and spent the afternoons at the
barn, watching Jake shell corn with a hand-sheller.

One morning, during this interval of fine weather, Antonia and her mother
rode over on one of their shaggy old horses to pay us a visit. It was the
first time Mrs. Shimerda had been to our house, and she ran about
examining our carpets and curtains and furniture, all the while commenting
upon them to her daughter in an envious, complaining tone. In the kitchen
she caught up an iron pot that stood on the back of the stove and said:
â€œYou got many, Shimerdas no got.â€ I thought it weak-minded of grandmother
to give the pot to her.

After dinner, when she was helping to wash the dishes, she said, tossing
her head: â€œYou got many things for cook. If I got all things like you, I
make much better.â€

She was a conceited, boastful old thing, and even misfortune could not
humble her. I was so annoyed that I felt coldly even toward Antonia and
listened unsympathetically when she told me her father was not well.

â€œMy papa sad for the old country. He not look good. He never make music
any more. At home he play violin all the time; for weddings and for dance.
Here never. When I beg him for play, he shake his head no. Some days he
take his violin out of his box and make with his fingers on the strings,
like this, but never he make the music. He donâ€™t like this kawn-tree.â€

â€œPeople who donâ€™t like this country ought to stay at home,â€ I said
severely. â€œWe donâ€™t make them come here.â€

â€œHe not want to come, nev-er!â€ she burst out. â€œMy mamenka make him come.
All the time she say: â€˜America big country; much money, much land for my
boys, much husband for my girls.â€™ My papa, he cry for leave his old
friends what make music with him. He love very much the man what play the
long horn like thisâ€â€”she indicated a slide trombone. â€œThey go to school
together and are friends from boys. But my mama, she want Ambrosch for be
rich, with many cattle.â€

â€œYour mama,â€ I said angrily, â€œwants other peopleâ€™s things.â€

â€œYour grandfather is rich,â€ she retorted fiercely. â€œWhy he not help my
papa ? Ambrosch be rich, too, after while, and he pay back. He is very
smart boy. For Ambrosch my mama come here.â€

Ambrosch was considered the important person in the family. Mrs. Shimerda
and Antonia always deferred to him, though he was often surly with them
and contemptuous toward his father. Ambrosch and his mother had everything
their own way. Though Antonia loved her father more than she did any one
else, she stood in awe of her elder brother.

After I watched Antonia and her mother go over the hill on their miserable
horse, carrying our iron pot with them, I turned to grandmother, who had
taken up her darning, and said I hoped that snooping old woman would nâ€™t
come to see us any more.

Grandmother chuckled and drove her bright needle across a hole in Ottoâ€™s
sock. â€œSheâ€™s not old, Jim, though I expect she seems old to you. No, I
would nâ€™t mourn if she never came again. But, you see, a body never knows
what traits poverty might bring out in â€™em. It makes a woman grasping to
see her children want for things. Now read me a chapter in â€˜The Prince of
the House of David.â€™ Letâ€™s forget the Bohemians.â€

We had three weeks of this mild, open weather. The cattle in the corral
ate corn almost as fast as the men could shell it for them, and we hoped
they would be ready for an early market. One morning the two big bulls,
Gladstone and Brigham Young, thought spring had come, and they began to
tease and butt at each other across the barbed wire that separated them.
Soon they got angry. They bellowed and pawed up the soft earth with their
hoofs, rolling their eyes and tossing their heads. Each withdrew to a far
corner of his own corral, and then they made for each other at a gallop.
Thud, thud, we could hear the impact of their great heads, and their
bellowing shook the pans on the kitchen shelves. Had they not been
dehorned, they would have torn each other to pieces. Pretty soon the fat
steers took it up and began butting and horning each other. Clearly, the
affair had to be stopped. We all stood by and watched admiringly while
Fuchs rode into the corral with a pitchfork and prodded the bulls again
and again, finally driving them apart.

The big storm of the winter began on my eleventh birthday, the 20th of
January. When I went down to breakfast that morning, Jake and Otto came in
white as snow-men, beating their hands and stamping their feet. They began
to laugh boisterously when they saw me, calling:â€”

â€œYouâ€™ve got a birthday present this time, Jim, and no mistake. They was a
full-grown blizzard ordered for you.â€

All day the storm went on. The snow did not fall this time, it simply
spilled out of heaven, like thousands of feather-beds being emptied. That
afternoon the kitchen was a carpenter-shop; the men brought in their tools
and made two great wooden shovels with long handles. Neither grandmother
nor I could go out in the storm, so Jake fed the chickens and brought in a
pitiful contribution of eggs.

Next day our men had to shovel until noon to reach the barnâ€”and the snow
was still falling! There had not been such a storm in the ten years my
grandfather had lived in Nebraska. He said at dinner that we would not try
to reach the cattleâ€”they were fat enough to go without their corn for a
day or two; but to-morrow we must feed them and thaw out their water-tap
so that they could drink. We could not so much as see the corrals, but we
knew the steers were over there, huddled together under the north bank.
Our ferocious bulls, subdued enough by this time, were probably warming
each otherâ€™s backs. â€œThisâ€™ll take the bile out of â€™em!â€ Fuchs remarked
gleefully.

At noon that day the hens had not been heard from. After dinner Jake and
Otto, their damp clothes now dried on them, stretched their stiff arms and
plunged again into the drifts. They made a tunnel under the snow to the
henhouse, with walls so solid that grandmother and I could walk back and
forth in it. We found the chickens asleep; perhaps they thought night had
come to stay. One old rooster was stirring about, pecking at the solid
lump of ice in their water-tin. When we flashed the lantern in their eyes,
the hens set up a great cackling and flew about clumsily, scattering
down-feathers. The mottled, pin-headed guinea-hens, always resentful of
captivity, ran screeching out into the tunnel and tried to poke their
ugly, painted faces through the snow walls. By five oâ€™clock the chores
were doneâ€”just when it was time to begin them all over again! That was a
strange, unnatural sort of day.




XIV


ON the morning of the 22d I wakened with a start. Before I opened my eyes,
I seemed to know that something had happened. I heard excited voices in
the kitchenâ€”grandmotherâ€™s was so shrill that I knew she must be almost
beside herself. I looked forward to any new crisis with delight. What
could it be, I wondered, as I hurried into my clothes. Perhaps the barn
had burned; perhaps the cattle had frozen to death; perhaps a neighbor was
lost in the storm.

Down in the kitchen grandfather was standing before the stove with his
hands behind him. Jake and Otto had taken off their boots and were rubbing
their woolen socks. Their clothes and boots were steaming, and they both
looked exhausted. On the bench behind the stove lay a man, covered up with
a blanket. Grandmother motioned me to the dining-room. I obeyed
reluctantly. I watched her as she came and went, carrying dishes. Her lips
were tightly compressed and she kept whispering to herself: â€œOh, dear
Saviour!â€ â€œLord, Thou knowest!â€

Presently grandfather came in and spoke to me: â€œJimmy, we will not have
prayers this morning, because we have a great deal to do. Old Mr. Shimerda
is dead, and his family are in great distress. Ambrosch came over here in
the middle of the night, and Jake and Otto went back with him. The boys
have had a hard night, and you must not bother them with questions. That
is Ambrosch, asleep on the bench. Come in to breakfast, boys.â€

After Jake and Otto had swallowed their first cup of coffee, they began to
talk excitedly, disregarding grandmotherâ€™s warning glances. I held my
tongue, but I listened with all my ears.

â€œNo, sir,â€ Fuchs said in answer to a question from grandfather, â€œnobody
heard the gun go off. Ambrosch was out with the ox team, trying to break a
road, and the women folks was shut up tight in their cave. When Ambrosch
come in it was dark and he did nâ€™t see nothing, but the oxen acted kind of
queer. One of â€™em ripped around and got away from himâ€”bolted clean out of
the stable. His hands is blistered where the rope run through. He got a
lantern and went back and found the old man, just as we seen him.â€

â€œPoor soul, poor soul!â€ grandmother groaned. â€œIâ€™d like to think he never
done it. He was always considerate and un-wishful to give trouble. How
could he forget himself and bring this on us!â€

â€œI donâ€™t think he was out of his head for a minute, Mrs. Burden,â€ Fuchs
declared. â€œHe done everything natural. You know he was always sort of
fixy, and fixy he was to the last. He shaved after dinner, and washed
hisself all over after the girls was done the dishes. Antonia heated the
water for him. Then he put on a clean shirt and clean socks, and after he
was dressed he kissed her and the little one and took his gun and said he
was going out to hunt rabbits. He must have gone right down to the barn
and done it then. He layed down on that bunk-bed, close to the ox stalls,
where he always slept. When we found him, everything was decent
except,â€â€”Fuchs wrinkled his brow and hesitated,â€”â€œexcept what he could nâ€™t
nowise foresee. His coat was hung on a peg, and his boots was under the
bed. Heâ€™d took off that silk neckcloth he always wore, and folded it
smooth and stuck his pin through it. He turned back his shirt at the neck
and rolled up his sleeves.â€

â€œI donâ€™t see how he could do it!â€ grandmother kept saying.

Otto misunderstood her. â€œWhy, mam, it was simple enough; he pulled the
trigger with his big toe. He layed over on his side and put the end of the
barrel in his mouth, then he drew up one foot and felt for the trigger. He
found it all right!â€

â€œMaybe he did,â€ said Jake grimly. â€œThereâ€™s something mighty queer about
it.â€

â€œNow what do you mean, Jake ?â€ grandmother asked sharply.

â€œWell, mam, I found Krajiekâ€™s axe under the manger, and I picks it up and
carries it over to the corpse, and I take my oath it just fit the gash in
the front of the old manâ€™s face. That there Krajiek had been sneakinâ€™
round, pale and quiet, and when he seen me examininâ€™ the axe, he begun
whimperinâ€™, â€˜My God, man, donâ€™t do that!â€™ â€˜I reckon Iâ€™m a-goinâ€™ to look
into this,â€™ says I. Then he begun to squeal like a rat and run about
wringinâ€™ his hands. â€˜Theyâ€™ll hang me!â€™ says he. â€˜My God, theyâ€™ll hang me
sure!â€™â€

Fuchs spoke up impatiently. â€œKrajiekâ€™s gone silly, Jake, and so have you.
The old man would nâ€™t have made all them preparations for Krajiek to
murder him, would he ? It donâ€™t hang together. The gun was right beside him
when Ambrosch found him.â€

â€œKrajiek could â€™aâ€™ put it there, could nâ€™t he ?â€ Jake demanded.

Grandmother broke in excitedly: â€œSee here, Jake Marpole, donâ€™t you go
trying to add murder to suicide. Weâ€™re deep enough in trouble. Otto reads
you too many of them detective stories.â€

â€œIt will be easy to decide all that, Emmaline,â€ said grandfather quietly.
â€œIf he shot himself in the way they think, the gash will be torn from the
inside outward.â€

â€œJust so it is, Mr. Burden,â€ Otto affirmed. â€œI seen bunches of hair and
stuff sticking to the poles and straw along the roof. They was blown up
there by gunshot, no question.â€

Grandmother told grandfather she meant to go over to the Shimerdas with
him.

â€œThere is nothing you can do,â€ he said doubtfully. â€œThe body canâ€™t be
touched until we get the coroner here from Black Hawk, and that will be a
matter of several days, this weather.â€

â€œWell, I can take them some victuals, anyway, and say a word of comfort to
them poor little girls. The oldest one was his darling, and was like a
right hand to him. He might have thought of her. Heâ€™s left her alone in a
hard world.â€ She glanced distrustfully at Ambrosch, who was now eating his
breakfast at the kitchen table.

Fuchs, although he had been up in the cold nearly all night, was going to
make the long ride to Black Hawk to fetch the priest and the coroner. On
the gray gelding, our best horse, he would try to pick his way across the
country with no roads to guide him.

â€œDonâ€™t you worry about me, Mrs. Burden,â€ he said cheerfully, as he put on
a second pair of socks. â€œIâ€™ve got a good nose for directions, and I never
did need much sleep. Itâ€™s the gray Iâ€™m worried about. Iâ€™ll save him what I
can, but itâ€™ll strain him, as sure as Iâ€™m telling you!â€

â€œThis is no time to be over-considerate of animals, Otto; do the best you
can for yourself. Stop at the Widow Steavensâ€™s for dinner. Sheâ€™s a good
woman, and sheâ€™ll do well by you.â€

After Fuchs rode away, I was left with Ambrosch. I saw a side of him I had
not seen before. He was deeply, even slavishly, devout. He did not say a
word all morning, but sat with his rosary in his hands, praying, now
silently, now aloud. He never looked away from his beads, nor lifted his
hands except to cross himself. Several times the poor boy fell asleep
where he sat, wakened with a start, and began to pray again.

No wagon could be got to the Shimerdasâ€™ until a road was broken, and that
would be a dayâ€™s job. Grandfather came from the barn on one of our big
black horses, and Jake lifted grandmother up behind him. She wore her
black hood and was bundled up in shawls. Grandfather tucked his bushy
white beard inside his overcoat. They looked very Biblical as they set
off, I thought. Jake and Ambrosch followed them, riding the other black
and my pony, carrying bundles of clothes that we had got together for Mrs.
Shimerda. I watched them go past the pond and over the hill by the drifted
cornfield. Then, for the first time, I realized that I was alone in the
house.

I felt a considerable extension of power and authority, and was anxious to
acquit myself creditably. I carried in cobs and wood from the long cellar,
and filled both the stoves. I remembered that in the hurry and excitement
of the morning nobody had thought of the chickens, and the eggs had not
been gathered. Going out through the tunnel, I gave the hens their corn,
emptied the ice from their drinking-pan, and filled it with water. After
the cat had had his milk, I could think of nothing else to do, and I sat
down to get warm. The quiet was delightful, and the ticking clock was the
most pleasant of companions. I got â€œRobinson Crusoeâ€ and tried to read,
but his life on the island seemed dull compared with ours. Presently, as I
looked with satisfaction about our comfortable sitting-room, it flashed
upon me that if Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s soul were lingering about in this world at
all, it would be here, in our house, which had been more to his liking
than any other in the neighborhood. I remembered his contented face when
he was with us on Christmas Day. If he could have lived with us, this
terrible thing would never have happened.

I knew it was homesickness that had killed Mr. Shimerda, and I wondered
whether his released spirit would not eventually find its way back to his
own country. I thought of how far it was to Chicago, and then to Virginia,
to Baltimore,â€”and then the great wintry ocean. No, he would not at once
set out upon that long journey. Surely, his exhausted spirit, so tired of
cold and crowding and the struggle with the ever-falling snow, was resting
now in this quiet house.

I was not frightened, but I made no noise. I did not wish to disturb him.
I went softly down to the kitchen which, tucked away so snugly
underground, always seemed to me the heart and center of the house. There,
on the bench behind the stove, I thought and thought about Mr. Shimerda.
Outside I could hear the wind singing over hundreds of miles of snow. It
was as if I had let the old man in out of the tormenting winter, and were
sitting there with him. I went over all that Antonia had ever told me
about his life before he came to this country; how he used to play the
fiddle at weddings and dances. I thought about the friends he had mourned
to leave, the trombone-player, the great forest full of game,â€”belonging,
as Antonia said, to the â€œnobles,â€â€”from which she and her mother used to
steal wood on moonlight nights. There was a white hart that lived in that
forest, and if any one killed it, he would be hanged, she said. Such vivid
pictures came to me that they might have been Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s memories, not
yet faded out from the air in which they had haunted him.

It had begun to grow dark when my household returned, and grandmother was
so tired that she went at once to bed. Jake and I got supper, and while we
were washing the dishes he told me in loud whispers about the state of
things over at the Shimerdasâ€™. Nobody could touch the body until the
coroner came. If any one did, something terrible would happen, apparently.
The dead man was frozen through, â€œjust as stiff as a dressed turkey you
hang out to freeze,â€ Jake said. The horses and oxen would not go into the
barn until he was frozen so hard that there was no longer any smell of
blood. They were stabled there now, with the dead man, because there was
no other place to keep them. A lighted lantern was kept hanging over Mr.
Shimerdaâ€™s head. Antonia and Ambrosch and the mother took turns going down
to pray beside him. The crazy boy went with them, because he did not feel
the cold. I believed he felt cold as much as any one else, but he liked to
be thought insensible to it. He was always coveting distinction, poor
Marek!

Ambrosch, Jake said, showed more human feeling than he would have supposed
him capable of; but he was chiefly concerned about getting a priest, and
about his fatherâ€™s soul, which he believed was in a place of torment and
would remain there until his family and the priest had prayed a great deal
for him. â€œAs I understand it,â€ Jake concluded, â€œit will be a matter of
years to pray his soul out of Purgatory, and right now heâ€™s in torment.â€

â€œI donâ€™t believe it,â€ I said stoutly. â€œI almost know it is nâ€™t true.â€ I
did not, of course, say that I believed he had been in that very kitchen
all afternoon, on his way back to his own country. Nevertheless, after I
went to bed, this idea of punishment and Purgatory came back on me
crushingly. I remembered the account of Dives in torment, and shuddered.
But Mr. Shimerda had not been rich and selfish; he had only been so
unhappy that he could not live any longer.




XV


OTTO FUCHS got back from Black Hawk at noon the next day. He reported that
the coroner would reach the Shimerdasâ€™ sometime that afternoon, but the
missionary priest was at the other end of his parish, a hundred miles
away, and the trains were not running. Fuchs had got a few hoursâ€™ sleep at
the livery barn in town, but he was afraid the gray gelding had strained
himself. Indeed, he was never the same horse afterward. That long trip
through the deep snow had taken all the endurance out of him.

Fuchs brought home with him a stranger, a young Bohemian who had taken a
homestead near Black Hawk, and who came on his only horse to help his
fellow-countrymen in their trouble. That was the first time I ever saw
Anton Jelinek. He was a strapping young fellow in the early twenties then,
handsome, warm-hearted, and full of life, and he came to us like a miracle
in the midst of that grim business. I remember exactly how he strode into
our kitchen in his felt boots and long wolfskin coat, his eyes and cheeks
bright with the cold. At sight of grandmother, he snatched off his fur
cap, greeting her in a deep, rolling voice which seemed older than he.

â€œI want to thank you very much, Mrs. Burden, for that you are so kind to
poor strangers from my kawn-tree.â€

He did not hesitate like a farmer boy, but looked one eagerly in the eye
when he spoke. Everything about him was warm and spontaneous. He said he
would have come to see the Shimerdas before, but he had hired out to husk
corn all the fall, and since winter began he had been going to the school
by the mill, to learn English, along with the little children. He told me
he had a nice â€œlady-teacherâ€ and that he liked to go to school.

At dinner grandfather talked to Jelinek more than he usually did to
strangers.

â€œWill they be much disappointed because we cannot get a priest ?â€ he asked.

Jelinek looked serious. â€œYes, sir, that is very bad for them. Their father
has done a great sin,â€ he looked straight at grandfather. â€œOur Lord has
said that.â€

Grandfather seemed to like his frankness. â€œWe believe that, too, Jelinek.
But we believe that Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s soul will come to its Creator as well
off without a priest. We believe that Christ is our only intercessor.â€

The young man shook his head. â€œI know how you think. My teacher at the
school has explain. But I have seen too much. I believe in prayer for the
dead. I have seen too much.â€

We asked him what he meant.

He glanced around the table. â€œYou want I shall tell you ? When I was a
little boy like this one, I begin to help the priest at the altar. I make
my first communion very young; what the Church teach seem plain to me. By
â€™nâ€™ by war-times come, when the Austrians fight us. We have very many
soldiers in camp near my village, and the cholera break out in that camp,
and the men die like flies. All day long our priest go about there to give
the Sacrament to dying men, and I go with him to carry the vessels with
the Holy Sacrament. Everybody that go near that camp catch the sickness
but me and the priest. But we have no sickness, we have no fear, because
we carry that blood and that body of Christ, and it preserve us.â€ He
paused, looking at grandfather. â€œThat I know, Mr. Burden, for it happened
to myself. All the soldiers know, too. When we walk along the road, the
old priest and me, we meet all the time soldiers marching and officers on
horse. All those officers, when they see what I carry under the cloth,
pull up their horses and kneel down on the ground in the road until we
pass. So I feel very bad for my kawntree-man to die without the Sacrament,
and to die in a bad way for his soul, and I feel sad for his family.â€

We had listened attentively. It was impossible not to admire his frank,
manly faith.

â€œI am always glad to meet a young man who thinks seriously about these
things,â€ said grandfather, â€œand I would never be the one to say you were
not in Godâ€™s care when you were among the soldiers.â€

After dinner it was decided that young Jelinek should hook our two strong
black farmhorses to the scraper and break a road through to the
Shimerdasâ€™, so that a wagon could go when it was necessary. Fuchs, who was
the only cabinet-maker in the neighborhood, was set to work on a coffin.

Jelinek put on his long wolfskin coat, and when we admired it, he told us
that he had shot and skinned the coyotes, and the young man who â€œbatchedâ€
with him, Jan Bouska, who had been a fur-worker in Vienna, made the coat.
From the windmill I watched Jelinek come out of the barn with the blacks,
and work his way up the hillside toward the cornfield. Sometimes he was
completely hidden by the clouds of snow that rose about him; then he and
the horses would emerge black and shining.

Our heavy carpenterâ€™s bench had to be brought from the barn and carried
down into the kitchen. Fuchs selected boards from a pile of planks
grandfather had hauled out from town in the fall to make a new floor for
the oats bin. When at last the lumber and tools were assembled, and the
doors were closed again and the cold drafts shut out, grandfather rode
away to meet the coroner at the Shimerdasâ€™, and Fuchs took off his coat
and settled down to work. I sat on his work-table and watched him. He did
not touch his tools at first, but figured for a long while on a piece of
paper, and measured the planks and made marks on them. While he was thus
engaged, he whistled softly to himself, or teasingly pulled at his
half-ear. Grandmother moved about quietly, so as not to disturb him. At
last he folded his ruler and turned a cheerful face to us.

â€œThe hardest part of my jobâ€™s done,â€ he announced. â€œItâ€™s the head end of
it that comes hard with me, especially when Iâ€™m out of practice. The last
time I made one of these, Mrs. Burden,â€ he continued, as he sorted and
tried his chisels, â€œwas for a fellow in the Black Tiger mine, up above
Silverton, Colorado. The mouth of that mine goes right into the face of
the cliff, and they used to put us in a bucket and run us over on a
trolley and shoot us into the shaft. The bucket traveled across a box
caÃ±on three hundred feet deep, and about a third full of water. Two Swedes
had fell out of that bucket once, and hit the water, feet down. If youâ€™ll
believe it, they went to work the next day. You canâ€™t kill a Swede. But in
my time a little Eyetalian tried the high dive, and it turned out
different with him. We was snowed in then, like we are now, and I happened
to be the only man in camp that could make a coffin for him. Itâ€™s a handy
thing to know, when you knock about like Iâ€™ve done.â€

â€œWeâ€™d be hard put to it now, if you did nâ€™t know, Otto,â€ grandmother said.

â€œYes, â€™m,â€ Fuchs admitted with modest pride. â€œSo few folks does know how
to make a good tight box thatâ€™ll turn water. I sometimes wonder if
thereâ€™ll be anybody about to do it for me. However, Iâ€™m not at all
particular that way.â€

All afternoon, wherever one went in the house, one could hear the panting
wheeze of the saw or the pleasant purring of the plane. They were such
cheerful noises, seeming to promise new things for living people: it was a
pity that those freshly planed pine boards were to be put underground so
soon. The lumber was hard to work because it was full of frost, and the
boards gave off a sweet smell of pine woods, as the heap of yellow
shavings grew higher and higher. I wondered why Fuchs had not stuck to
cabinet-work, he settled down to it with such ease and content. He handled
the tools as if he liked the feel of them; and when he planed, his hands
went back and forth over the boards in an eager, beneficent way as if he
were blessing them. He broke out now and then into German hymns, as if
this occupation brought back old times to him.

At four oâ€™clock Mr. Bushy, the postmaster, with another neighbor who lived
east of us, stopped in to get warm. They were on their way to the
Shimerdasâ€™. The news of what had happened over there had somehow got
abroad through the snow-blocked country. Grandmother gave the visitors
sugar-cakes and hot coffee. Before these callers were gone, the brother of
the Widow Steavens, who lived on the Black Hawk road, drew up at our door,
and after him came the father of the German family, our nearest neighbors
on the south. They dismounted and joined us in the dining-room. They were
all eager for any details about the suicide, and they were greatly
concerned as to where Mr. Shimerda would be buried. The nearest Catholic
cemetery was at Black Hawk, and it might be weeks before a wagon could get
so far. Besides, Mr. Bushy and grandmother were sure that a man who had
killed himself could not be buried in a Catholic graveyard. There was a
burying-ground over by the Norwegian church, west of Squaw Creek; perhaps
the Norwegians would take Mr. Shimerda in.

After our visitors rode away in single file over the hill, we returned to
the kitchen. Grandmother began to make the icing for a chocolate cake, and
Otto again filled the house with the exciting, expectant song of the
plane. One pleasant thing about this time was that everybody talked more
than usual. I had never heard the postmaster say anything but â€œOnly
papers, to-day,â€ or, â€œIâ€™ve got a sackful of mail for ye,â€ until this
afternoon. Grandmother always talked, dear woman; to herself or to the
Lord, if there was no one else to listen; but grandfather was naturally
taciturn, and Jake and Otto were often so tired after supper that I used
to feel as if I were surrounded by a wall of silence. Now every one seemed
eager to talk. That afternoon Fuchs told me story after story; about the
Black Tiger mine, and about violent deaths and casual buryings, and the
queer fancies of dying men. You never really knew a man, he said, until
you saw him die. Most men were game, and went without a grudge.

The postmaster, going home, stopped to say that grandfather would bring
the coroner back with him to spend the night. The officers of the
Norwegian church, he told us, had held a meeting and decided that the
Norwegian graveyard could not extend its hospitality to Mr. Shimerda.

Grandmother was indignant. â€œIf these foreigners are so clannish, Mr.
Bushy, weâ€™ll have to have an American graveyard that will be more
liberal-minded. Iâ€™ll get right after Josiah to start one in the spring. If
anything was to happen to me, I donâ€™t want the Norwegians holding
inquisitions over me to see whether Iâ€™m good enough to be laid amongst
â€™em.â€

Soon grandfather returned, bringing with him Anton Jelinek, and that
important person, the coroner. He was a mild, flurried old man, a Civil
War veteran, with one sleeve hanging empty. He seemed to find this case
very perplexing, and said if it had not been for grandfather he would have
sworn out a warrant against Krajiek. â€œThe way he acted, and the way his
axe fit the wound, was enough to convict any man.â€

Although it was perfectly clear that Mr. Shimerda had killed himself, Jake
and the coroner thought something ought to be done to Krajiek because he
behaved like a guilty man. He was badly frightened, certainly, and perhaps
he even felt some stirrings of remorse for his indifference to the old
manâ€™s misery and loneliness.

At supper the men ate like vikings, and the chocolate cake, which I had
hoped would linger on until to-morrow in a mutilated condition,
disappeared on the second round. They talked excitedly about where they
should bury Mr. Shimerda; I gathered that the neighbors were all disturbed
and shocked about something. It developed that Mrs. Shimerda and Ambrosch
wanted the old man buried on the southwest corner of their own land;
indeed, under the very stake that marked the corner. Grandfather had
explained to Ambrosch that some day, when the country was put under fence
and the roads were confined to section lines, two roads would cross
exactly on that corner. But Ambrosch only said, â€œIt makes no matter.â€

Grandfather asked Jelinek whether in the old country there was some
superstition to the effect that a suicide must be buried at the
cross-roads.

Jelinek said he did nâ€™t know; he seemed to remember hearing there had once
been such a custom in Bohemia. â€œMrs. Shimerda is made up her mind,â€ he
added. â€œI try to persuade her, and say it looks bad for her to all the
neighbors; but she say so it must be. â€˜There I will bury him, if I dig the
grave myself,â€™ she say. I have to promise her I help Ambrosch make the
grave to-morrow.â€

Grandfather smoothed his beard and looked judicial. â€œI donâ€™t know whose
wish should decide the matter, if not hers. But if she thinks she will
live to see the people of this country ride over that old manâ€™s head, she
is mistaken.â€




XVI


MR. SHIMERDA lay dead in the barn four days, and on the fifth they buried
him. All day Friday Jelinek was off with Ambrosch digging the grave,
chopping out the frozen earth with old axes. On Saturday we breakfasted
before daylight and got into the wagon with the coffin. Jake and Jelinek
went ahead on horseback to cut the body loose from the pool of blood in
which it was frozen fast to the ground.

When grandmother and I went into the Shimerdasâ€™ house, we found the
women-folk alone; Ambrosch and Marek were at the barn. Mrs. Shimerda sat
crouching by the stove, Antonia was washing dishes. When she saw me she
ran out of her dark corner and threw her arms around me. â€œOh, Jimmy,â€ she
sobbed, â€œwhat you tink for my lovely papa!â€ It seemed to me that I could
feel her heart breaking as she clung to me.

Mrs. Shimerda, sitting on the stump by the stove, kept looking over her
shoulder toward the door while the neighbors were arriving. They came on
horseback, all except the postmaster, who brought his family in a wagon
over the only broken wagon-trail. The Widow Steavens rode up from her farm
eight miles down the Black Hawk road. The cold drove the women into the
cave-house, and it was soon crowded. A fine, sleety snow was beginning to
fall, and every one was afraid of another storm and anxious to have the
burial over with.

Grandfather and Jelinek came to tell Mrs. Shimerda that it was time to
start. After bundling her mother up in clothes the neighbors had brought,
Antonia put on an old cape from our house and the rabbit-skin hat her
father had made for her. Four men carried Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s box up the hill;
Krajiek slunk along behind them. The coffin was too wide for the door, so
it was put down on the slope outside. I slipped out from the cave and
looked at Mr. Shimerda. He was lying on his side, with his knees drawn up.
His body was draped in a black shawl, and his head was bandaged in white
muslin, like a mummyâ€™s; one of his long, shapely hands lay out on the
black cloth; that was all one could see of him.

Mrs. Shimerda came out and placed an open prayer-book against the body,
making the sign of the cross on the bandaged head with her fingers.
Ambrosch knelt down and made the same gesture, and after him Antonia and
Marek. Yulka hung back. Her mother pushed her forward, and kept saying
something to her over and over. Yulka knelt down, shut her eyes, and put
out her hand a little way, but she drew it back and began to cry wildly.
She was afraid to touch the bandage. Mrs. Shimerda caught her by the
shoulders and pushed her toward the coffin, but grandmother interfered.

â€œNo, Mrs. Shimerda,â€ she said firmly, â€œI wonâ€™t stand by and see that child
frightened into spasms. She is too little to understand what you want of
her. Let her alone.â€

At a look from grandfather, Fuchs and Jelinek placed the lid on the box,
and began to nail it down over Mr. Shimerda. I was afraid to look at
Antonia. She put her arms round Yulka and held the little girl close to
her.

The coffin was put into the wagon. We drove slowly away, against the fine,
icy snow which cut our faces like a sand-blast. When we reached the grave,
it looked a very little spot in that snow-covered waste. The men took the
coffin to the edge of the hole and lowered it with ropes. We stood about
watching them, and the powdery snow lay without melting on the caps and
shoulders of the men and the shawls of the women. Jelinek spoke in a
persuasive tone to Mrs. Shimerda, and then turned to grandfather.

â€œShe says, Mr. Burden, she is very glad if you can make some prayer for
him here in English, for the neighbors to understand.â€

Grandmother looked anxiously at grandfather. He took off his hat, and the
other men did likewise. I thought his prayer remarkable. I still remember
it. He began, â€œOh, great and just God, no man among us knows what the
sleeper knows, nor is it for us to judge what lies between him and Thee.â€
He prayed that if any man there had been remiss toward the stranger come
to a far country, God would forgive him and soften his heart. He recalled
the promises to the widow and the fatherless, and asked God to smooth the
way before this widow and her children, and to â€œincline the hearts of men
to deal justly with her.â€ In closing, he said we were leaving Mr. Shimerda
at â€œThy judgment seat, which is also Thy mercy seat.â€

All the time he was praying, grandmother watched him through the black
fingers of her glove, and when he said â€œAmen,â€ I thought she looked
satisfied with him. She turned to Otto and whispered, â€œCanâ€™t you start a
hymn, Fuchs ? It would seem less heathenish.â€

Fuchs glanced about to see if there was general approval of her
suggestion, then began, â€œJesus, Lover of my Soul,â€ and all the men and
women took it up after him. Whenever I have heard the hymn since, it has
made me remember that white waste and the little group of people; and the
bluish air, full of fine, eddying snow, like long veils flying:â€”

  â€œWhile the nearer waters roll,
  While the tempest still is high.â€



Years afterward, when the open-grazing days were over, and the red grass
had been ploughed under and under until it had almost disappeared from the
prairie; when all the fields were under fence, and the roads no longer ran
about like wild things, but followed the surveyed section-lines, Mr.
Shimerdaâ€™s grave was still there, with a sagging wire fence around it, and
an unpainted wooden cross. As grandfather had predicted, Mrs. Shimerda
never saw the roads going over his head. The road from the north curved a
little to the east just there, and the road from the west swung out a
little to the south; so that the grave, with its tall red grass that was
never mowed, was like a little island; and at twilight, under a new moon
or the clear evening star, the dusty roads used to look like soft gray
rivers flowing past it. I never came upon the place without emotion, and
in all that country it was the spot most dear to me. I loved the dim
superstition, the propitiatory intent, that had put the grave there; and
still more I loved the spirit that could not carry out the sentenceâ€”the
error from the surveyed lines, the clemency of the soft earth roads along
which the home-coming wagons rattled after sunset. Never a tired driver
passed the wooden cross, I am sure, without wishing well to the sleeper.




XVII


WHEN spring came, after that hard winter, one could not get enough of the
nimble air. Every morning I wakened with a fresh consciousness that winter
was over. There were none of the signs of spring for which I used to watch
in Virginia, no budding woods or blooming gardens. There was onlyâ€”spring
itself; the throb of it, the light restlessness, the vital essence of it
everywhere; in the sky, in the swift clouds, in the pale sunshine, and in
the warm, high windâ€”rising suddenly, sinking suddenly, impulsive and
playful like a big puppy that pawed you and then lay down to be petted. If
I had been tossed down blindfold on that red prairie, I should have known
that it was spring.

Everywhere now there was the smell of burning grass. Our neighbors burned
off their pasture before the new grass made a start, so that the fresh
growth would not be mixed with the dead stand of last year. Those light,
swift fires, running about the country, seemed a part of the same kindling
that was in the air.

The Shimerdas were in their new log house by then. The neighbors had
helped them to build it in March. It stood directly in front of their old
cave, which they used as a cellar. The family were now fairly equipped to
begin their struggle with the soil. They had four comfortable rooms to
live in, a new windmill,â€”bought on credit,â€”a chicken-house and poultry.
Mrs. Shimerda had paid grandfather ten dollars for a milk cow, and was to
give him fifteen more as soon as they harvested their first crop.

When I rode up to the Shimerdasâ€™ one bright windy afternoon in April,
Yulka ran out to meet me. It was to her, now, that I gave reading lessons;
Antonia was busy with other things. I tied my pony and went into the
kitchen where Mrs. Shimerda was baking bread, chewing poppy seeds as she
worked. By this time she could speak enough English to ask me a great many
questions about what our men were doing in the fields. She seemed to think
that my elders withheld helpful information, and that from me she might
get valuable secrets. On this occasion she asked me very craftily when
grandfather expected to begin planting corn. I told her, adding that he
thought we should have a dry spring and that the corn would not be held
back by too much rain, as it had been last year.

She gave me a shrewd glance. â€œHe not Jesus,â€ she blustered; â€œhe not know
about the wet and the dry.â€

I did not answer her; what was the use ? As I sat waiting for the hour when
Ambrosch and Antonia would return from the fields, I watched Mrs. Shimerda
at her work. She took from the oven a coffee-cake which she wanted to keep
warm for supper, and wrapped it in a quilt stuffed with feathers. I have
seen her put even a roast goose in this quilt to keep it hot. When the
neighbors were there building the new house they saw her do this, and the
story got abroad that the Shimerdas kept their food in their feather beds.

When the sun was dropping low, Antonia came up the big south draw with her
team. How much older she had grown in eight months! She had come to us a
child, and now she was a tall, strong young girl, although her fifteenth
birthday had just slipped by. I ran out and met her as she brought her
horses up to the windmill to water them. She wore the boots her father had
so thoughtfully taken off before he shot himself, and his old fur cap. Her
outgrown cotton dress switched about her calves, over the boot-tops. She
kept her sleeves rolled up all day, and her arms and throat were burned as
brown as a sailorâ€™s. Her neck came up strongly out of her shoulders, like
the bole of a tree out of the turf. One sees that draft-horse neck among
the peasant women in all old countries.

She greeted me gayly, and began at once to tell me how much ploughing she
had done that day. Ambrosch, she said, was on the north quarter, breaking
sod with the oxen.

â€œJim, you ask Jake how much he ploughed to-day. I donâ€™t want that Jake get
more done in one day than me. I want we have very much corn this fall.â€

While the horses drew in the water, and nosed each other, and then drank
again, Antonia sat down on the windmill step and rested her head on her
hand. â€œYou see the big prairie fire from your place last night ? I hope
your grandpa ainâ€™t lose no stacks ?â€

â€œNo, we did nâ€™t. I came to ask you something, Tony. Grandmother wants to
know if you canâ€™t go to the term of school that begins next week over at
the sod schoolhouse. She says thereâ€™s a good teacher, and youâ€™d learn a
lot.â€

Antonia stood up, lifting and dropping her shoulders as if they were
stiff. â€œI ainâ€™t got time to learn. I can work like mans now. My mother
canâ€™t say no more how Ambrosch do all and nobody to help him. I can work
as much as him. School is all right for little boys. I help make this land
one good farm.â€

She clucked to her team and started for the barn. I walked beside her,
feeling vexed. Was she going to grow up boastful like her mother, I
wondered ? Before we reached the stable, I felt something tense in her
silence, and glancing up I saw that she was crying. She turned her face
from me and looked off at the red streak of dying light, over the dark
prairie.

I climbed up into the loft and threw down the hay for her, while she
unharnessed her team. We walked slowly back toward the house. Ambrosch had
come in from the north quarter, and was watering his oxen at the tank.

Antonia took my hand. â€œSometime you will tell me all those nice things you
learn at the school, wonâ€™t you, Jimmy ?â€ she asked with a sudden rush of
feeling in her voice. â€œMy father, he went much to school. He know a great
deal; how to make the fine cloth like what you not got here. He play horn
and violin, and he read so many books that the priests in Bohemie come to
talk to him. You wonâ€™t forget my father, Jim ?â€

â€œNo,â€ I said, â€œI will never forget him.â€

Mrs. Shimerda asked me to stay for supper. After Ambrosch and Antonia had
washed the field dust from their hands and faces at the wash-basin by the
kitchen door, we sat down at the oilcloth-covered table. Mrs. Shimerda
ladled meal mush out of an iron pot and poured milk on it. After the mush
we had fresh bread and sorghum molasses, and coffee with the cake that had
been kept warm in the feathers. Antonia and Ambrosch were talking in
Bohemian; disputing about which of them had done more ploughing that day.
Mrs. Shimerda egged them on, chuckling while she gobbled her food.

              [Illustration: Antonia ploughing in the field]

Presently Ambrosch said sullenly in English: â€œYou take them ox to-morrow
and try the sod plough. Then you not be so smart.â€

His sister laughed. â€œDonâ€™t be mad. I know itâ€™s awful hard work for break
sod. I milk the cow for you to-morrow, if you want.â€

Mrs. Shimerda turned quickly to me. â€œThat cow not give so much milk like
what your grandpa say. If he make talk about fifteen dollars, I send him
back the cow.â€

â€œHe does nâ€™t talk about the fifteen dollars,â€ I exclaimed indignantly. â€œHe
does nâ€™t find fault with people.â€

â€œHe say I break his saw when we build, and I never,â€ grumbled Ambrosch.

I knew he had broken the saw, and then hid it and lied about it. I began
to wish I had not stayed for supper. Everything was disagreeable to me.
Antonia ate so noisily now, like a man, and she yawned often at the table
and kept stretching her arms over her head, as if they ached. Grandmother
had said, â€œHeavy field workâ€™ll spoil that girl. Sheâ€™ll lose all her nice
ways and get rough ones.â€ She had lost them already.

After supper I rode home through the sad, soft spring twilight. Since
winter I had seen very little of Antonia. She was out in the fields from
sun-up until sun-down. If I rode over to see her where she was ploughing,
she stopped at the end of a row to chat for a moment, then gripped her
plough-handles, clucked to her team, and waded on down the furrow, making
me feel that she was now grown up and had no time for me. On Sundays she
helped her mother make garden or sewed all day. Grandfather was pleased
with Antonia. When we complained of her, he only smiled and said, â€œShe
will help some fellow get ahead in the world.â€

Nowadays Tony could talk of nothing but the prices of things, or how much
she could lift and endure. She was too proud of her strength. I knew, too,
that Ambrosch put upon her some chores a girl ought not to do, and that
the farmhands around the country joked in a nasty way about it. Whenever I
saw her come up the furrow, shouting to her beasts, sunburned, sweaty, her
dress open at the neck, and her throat and chest dust-plastered, I used to
think of the tone in which poor Mr. Shimerda, who could say so little, yet
managed to say so much when he exclaimed, â€œMy Ãn-tonia!â€




XVIII


AFTER I began to go to the country school, I saw less of the Bohemians. We
were sixteen pupils at the sod schoolhouse, and we all came on horseback
and brought our dinner. My schoolmates were none of them very interesting,
but I somehow felt that by making comrades of them I was getting even with
Antonia for her indifference. Since the fatherâ€™s death, Ambrosch was more
than ever the head of the house and he seemed to direct the feelings as
well as the fortunes of his women-folk. Antonia often quoted his opinions
to me, and she let me see that she admired him, while she thought of me
only as a little boy. Before the spring was over, there was a distinct
coldness between us and the Shimerdas. It came about in this way.

One Sunday I rode over there with Jake to get a horse-collar which
Ambrosch had borrowed from him and had not returned. It was a beautiful
blue morning. The buffalo-peas were blooming in pink and purple masses
along the roadside, and the larks, perched on last yearâ€™s dried sunflower
stalks, were singing straight at the sun, their heads thrown back and
their yellow breasts a-quiver. The wind blew about us in warm, sweet
gusts. We rode slowly, with a pleasant sense of Sunday indolence.

We found the Shimerdas working just as if it were a week-day. Marek was
cleaning out the stable, and Antonia and her mother were making garden,
off across the pond in the draw-head. Ambrosch was up on the windmill
tower, oiling the wheel. He came down, not very cordially. When Jake asked
for the collar, he grunted and scratched his head. The collar belonged to
grandfather, of course, and Jake, feeling responsible for it, flared up.

â€œNow, donâ€™t you say you have nâ€™t got it, Ambrosch, because I know you
have, and if you ainâ€™t a-going to look for it, I will.â€

Ambrosch shrugged his shoulders and sauntered down the hill toward the
stable. I could see that it was one of his mean days. Presently he
returned, carrying a collar that had been badly usedâ€”trampled in the dirt
and gnawed by rats until the hair was sticking out of it.

â€œThis what you want ?â€ he asked surlily.

Jake jumped off his horse. I saw a wave of red come up under the rough
stubble on his face. â€œThat ainâ€™t the piece of harness I loaned you,
Ambrosch; or if it is, youâ€™ve used it shameful. I ainâ€™t a-going to carry
such a looking thing back to Mr. Burden.â€

Ambrosch dropped the collar on the ground. â€œAll right,â€ he said coolly,
took up his oil-can, and began to climb the mill. Jake caught him by the
belt of his trousers and yanked him back. Ambroschâ€™s feet had scarcely
touched the ground when he lunged out with a vicious kick at Jakeâ€™s
stomach. Fortunately Jake was in such a position that he could dodge it.
This was not the sort of thing country boys did when they played at
fisticuffs, and Jake was furious. He landed Ambrosch a blow on the headâ€”it
sounded like the crack of an axe on a cow-pumpkin. Ambrosch dropped over,
stunned.

We heard squeals, and looking up saw Antonia and her mother coming on the
run. They did not take the path around the pond, but plunged through the
muddy water, without even lifting their skirts. They came on, screaming
and clawing the air. By this time Ambrosch had come to his senses and was
sputtering with nose-bleed. Jake sprang into his saddle. â€œLetâ€™s get out of
this, Jim,â€ he called.

Mrs. Shimerda threw her hands over her head and clutched as if she were
going to pull down lightning. â€œLaw, law!â€ she shrieked after us. â€œLaw for
knock my Ambrosch down!â€

â€œI never like you no more, Jake and Jim Burden,â€ Antonia panted. â€œNo
friends any more!â€

Jake stopped and turned his horse for a second. â€œWell, youâ€™re a damned
ungrateful lot, the whole pack of you,â€ he shouted back. â€œI guess the
Burdens can get along without you. Youâ€™ve been a sight of trouble to them,
anyhow!â€

We rode away, feeling so outraged that the fine morning was spoiled for
us. I had nâ€™t a word to say, and poor Jake was white as paper and
trembling all over. It made him sick to get so angry. â€œThey ainâ€™t the
same, Jimmy,â€ he kept saying in a hurt tone. â€œThese foreigners ainâ€™t the
same. You canâ€™t trust â€™em to be fair. Itâ€™s dirty to kick a feller. You
heard how the women turned on youâ€”and after all we went through on account
of â€™em last winter! They ainâ€™t to be trusted. I donâ€™t want to see you get
too thick with any of â€™em.â€

â€œIâ€™ll never be friends with them again, Jake,â€ I declared hotly. â€œI
believe they are all like Krajiek and Ambrosch underneath.â€

Grandfather heard our story with a twinkle in his eye. He advised Jake to
ride to town to-morrow, go to a justice of the peace, tell him he had
knocked young Shimerda down, and pay his fine. Then if Mrs. Shimerda was
inclined to make troubleâ€”her son was still under ageâ€”she would be
forestalled. Jake said he might as well take the wagon and haul to market
the pig he had been fattening. On Monday, about an hour after Jake had
started, we saw Mrs. Shimerda and her Ambrosch proudly driving by, looking
neither to the right nor left. As they rattled out of sight down the Black
Hawk road, grandfather chuckled, saying he had rather expected she would
follow the matter up.

Jake paid his fine with a ten-dollar bill grandfather had given him for
that purpose. But when the Shimerdas found that Jake sold his pig in town
that day, Ambrosch worked it out in his shrewd head that Jake had to sell
his pig to pay his fine. This theory afforded the Shimerdas great
satisfaction, apparently. For weeks afterward, whenever Jake and I met
Antonia on her way to the post-office, or going along the road with her
work-team, she would clap her hands and call to us in a spiteful, crowing
voice:â€”

â€œJake-y, Jake-y, sell the pig and pay the slap!â€

Otto pretended not to be surprised at Antoniaâ€™s behavior. He only lifted
his brows and said, â€œYou canâ€™t tell me anything new about a Czech; Iâ€™m an
Austrian.â€

Grandfather was never a party to what Jake called our feud with the
Shimerdas. Ambrosch and Antonia always greeted him respectfully, and he
asked them about their affairs and gave them advice as usual. He thought
the future looked hopeful for them. Ambrosch was a far-seeing fellow; he
soon realized that his oxen were too heavy for any work except breaking
sod, and he succeeded in selling them to a newly arrived German. With the
money he bought another team of horses, which grandfather selected for
him. Marek was strong, and Ambrosch worked him hard; but he could never
teach him to cultivate corn, I remember. The one idea that had ever got
through poor Marekâ€™s thick head was that all exertion was meritorious. He
always bore down on the handles of the cultivator and drove the blades so
deep into the earth that the horses were soon exhausted.

In June Ambrosch went to work at Mr. Bushyâ€™s for a week, and took Marek
with him at full wages. Mrs. Shimerda then drove the second cultivator;
she and Antonia worked in the fields all day and did the chores at night.
While the two women were running the place alone, one of the new horses
got colic and gave them a terrible fright.

Antonia had gone down to the barn one night to see that all was well
before she went to bed, and she noticed that one of the roans was swollen
about the middle and stood with its head hanging. She mounted another
horse, without waiting to saddle him, and hammered on our door just as we
were going to bed. Grandfather answered her knock. He did not send one of
his men, but rode back with her himself, taking a syringe and an old piece
of carpet he kept for hot applications when our horses were sick. He found
Mrs. Shimerda sitting by the horse with her lantern, groaning and wringing
her hands. It took but a few moments to release the gases pent up in the
poor beast, and the two women heard the rush of wind and saw the roan
visibly diminish in girth.

â€œIf I lose that horse, Mr. Burden,â€ Antonia exclaimed, â€œI never stay here
till Ambrosch come home! I go drown myself in the pond before morning.â€

When Ambrosch came back from Mr. Bushyâ€™s, we learned that he had given
Marekâ€™s wages to the priest at Black Hawk, for masses for their fatherâ€™s
soul. Grandmother thought Antonia needed shoes more than Mr. Shimerda
needed prayers, but grandfather said tolerantly, â€œIf he can spare six
dollars, pinched as he is, it shows he believes what he professes.â€

It was grandfather who brought about a reconciliation with the Shimerdas.
One morning he told us that the small grain was coming on so well, he
thought he would begin to cut his wheat on the first of July. He would
need more men, and if it were agreeable to every one he would engage
Ambrosch for the reaping and thrashing, as the Shimerdas had no small
grain of their own.

â€œI think, Emmaline,â€ he concluded, â€œI will ask Antonia to come over and
help you in the kitchen. She will be glad to earn something, and it will
be a good time to end misunderstandings. I may as well ride over this
morning and make arrangements. Do you want to go with me, Jim ?â€ His tone
told me that he had already decided for me.

After breakfast we set off together. When Mrs. Shimerda saw us coming, she
ran from her door down into the draw behind the stable, as if she did not
want to meet us. Grandfather smiled to himself while he tied his horse,
and we followed her.

Behind the barn we came upon a funny sight. The cow had evidently been
grazing somewhere in the draw. Mrs. Shimerda had run to the animal, pulled
up the lariat pin, and, when we came upon her, she was trying to hide the
cow in an old cave in the bank. As the hole was narrow and dark, the cow
held back, and the old woman was slapping and pushing at her hind
quarters, trying to spank her into the draw-side.

Grandfather ignored her singular occupation and greeted her politely.
â€œGood-morning, Mrs. Shimerda. Can you tell me where I will find Ambrosch ?
Which field ?â€

â€œHe with the sod corn.â€ She pointed toward the north, still standing in
front of the cow as if she hoped to conceal it.

â€œHis sod corn will be good for fodder this winter,â€ said grandfather
encouragingly. â€œAnd where is Antonia ?â€

â€œShe go with.â€ Mrs. Shimerda kept wiggling her bare feet about nervously
in the dust.

â€œVery well. I will ride up there. I want them to come over and help me cut
my oats and wheat next month. I will pay them wages. Good-morning. By the
way, Mrs. Shimerda,â€ he said as he turned up the path, â€œI think we may as
well call it square about the cow.â€

She started and clutched the rope tighter. Seeing that she did not
understand, grandfather turned back. â€œYou need not pay me anything more;
no more money. The cow is yours.â€

â€œPay no more, keep cow ?â€ she asked in a bewildered tone, her narrow eyes
snapping at us in the sunlight.

â€œExactly. Pay no more, keep cow.â€ He nodded.

Mrs. Shimerda dropped the rope, ran after us, and crouching down beside
grandfather, she took his hand and kissed it. I doubt if he had ever been
so much embarrassed before. I was a little startled, too. Somehow, that
seemed to bring the Old World very close.

We rode away laughing, and grandfather said: â€œI expect she thought we had
come to take the cow away for certain, Jim. I wonder if she would nâ€™t have
scratched a little if weâ€™d laid hold of that lariat rope!â€

Our neighbors seemed glad to make peace with us. The next Sunday Mrs.
Shimerda came over and brought Jake a pair of socks she had knitted. She
presented them with an air of great magnanimity, saying, â€œNow you not come
any more for knock my Ambrosch down ?â€

Jake laughed sheepishly. â€œI donâ€™t want to have no trouble with Ambrosch.
If heâ€™ll let me alone, Iâ€™ll let him alone.â€

â€œIf he slap you, we ainâ€™t got no pig for pay the fine,â€ she said
insinuatingly.

Jake was not at all disconcerted. â€œHave the last word, mam,â€ he said
cheerfully. â€œItâ€™s a ladyâ€™s privilege.â€




XIX


JULY came on with that breathless, brilliant heat which makes the plains
of Kansas and Nebraska the best corn country in the world. It seemed as if
we could hear the corn growing in the night; under the stars one caught a
faint crackling in the dewy, heavy-odored cornfields where the feathered
stalks stood so juicy and green. If all the great plain from the Missouri
to the Rocky Mountains had been under glass, and the heat regulated by a
thermometer, it could not have been better for the yellow tassels that
were ripening and fertilizing each other day by day. The cornfields were
far apart in those times, with miles of wild grazing land between. It took
a clear, meditative eye like my grandfatherâ€™s to foresee that they would
enlarge and multiply until they would be, not the Shimerdasâ€™ cornfields,
or Mr. Bushyâ€™s, but the worldâ€™s cornfields; that their yield would be one
of the great economic facts, like the wheat crop of Russia, which underlie
all the activities of men, in peace or war.

The burning sun of those few weeks, with occasional rains at night,
secured the corn. After the milky ears were once formed, we had little to
fear from dry weather. The men were working so hard in the wheatfields
that they did not notice the heat,â€”though I was kept busy carrying water
for them,â€”and grandmother and Antonia had so much to do in the kitchen
that they could not have told whether one day was hotter than another.
Each morning, while the dew was still on the grass, Antonia went with me
up to the garden to get early vegetables for dinner. Grandmother made her
wear a sunbonnet, but as soon as we reached the garden she threw it on the
grass and let her hair fly in the breeze. I remember how, as we bent over
the pea-vines, beads of perspiration used to gather on her upper lip like
a little mustache.

â€œOh, better I like to work out of doors than in a house!â€ she used to sing
joyfully. â€œI not care that your grandmother say it makes me like a man. I
like to be like a man.â€ She would toss her head and ask me to feel the
muscles swell in her brown arm.

We were glad to have her in the house. She was so gay and responsive that
one did not mind her heavy, running step, or her clattery way with pans.
Grandmother was in high spirits during the weeks that Antonia worked for
us.

              [Illustration: Jim and Antonia in the garden]

All the nights were close and hot during that harvest season. The
harvesters slept in the hayloft because it was cooler there than in the
house. I used to lie in my bed by the open window, watching the heat
lightning play softly along the horizon, or looking up at the gaunt frame
of the windmill against the blue night sky. One night there was a
beautiful electric storm, though not enough rain fell to damage the cut
grain. The men went down to the barn immediately after supper, and when
the dishes were washed Antonia and I climbed up on the slanting roof of
the chicken-house to watch the clouds. The thunder was loud and metallic,
like the rattle of sheet iron, and the lightning broke in great zigzags
across the heavens, making everything stand out and come close to us for a
moment. Half the sky was checkered with black thunderheads, but all the
west was luminous and clear: in the lightning-flashes it looked like deep
blue water, with the sheen of moonlight on it; and the mottled part of the
sky was like marble pavement, like the quay of some splendid sea-coast
city, doomed to destruction. Great warm splashes of rain fell on our
upturned faces. One black cloud, no bigger than a little boat, drifted out
into the clear space unattended, and kept moving westward. All about us we
could hear the felty beat of the raindrops on the soft dust of the
farmyard. Grandmother came to the door and said it was late, and we would
get wet out there.

â€œIn a minute we come,â€ Antonia called back to her. â€œI like your
grandmother, and all things here,â€ she sighed. â€œI wish my papa live to see
this summer. I wish no winter ever come again.â€

â€œIt will be summer a long while yet,â€ I reassured her. â€œWhy are nâ€™t you
always nice like this, Tony ?â€

â€œHow nice ?â€

â€œWhy, just like this; like yourself. Why do you all the time try to be
like Ambrosch ?â€

She put her arms under her head and lay back, looking up at the sky. â€œIf I
live here, like you, that is different. Things will be easy for you. But
they will be hard for us.â€





BOOK IIâ€”THE HIRED GIRLS




I


I HAD been living with my grandfather for nearly three years when he
decided to move to Black Hawk. He and grandmother were getting old for the
heavy work of a farm, and as I was now thirteen they thought I ought to be
going to school. Accordingly our homestead was rented to â€œthat good woman,
the Widow Steavens,â€ and her bachelor brother, and we bought Preacher
Whiteâ€™s house, at the north end of Black Hawk. This was the first town
house one passed driving in from the farm, a landmark which told country
people their long ride was over.

We were to move to Black Hawk in March, and as soon as grandfather had
fixed the date he let Jake and Otto know of his intention. Otto said he
would not be likely to find another place that suited him so well; that he
was tired of farming and thought he would go back to what he called the
â€œwild West.â€ Jake Marpole, lured by Ottoâ€™s stories of adventure, decided
to go with him. We did our best to dissuade Jake. He was so handicapped by
illiteracy and by his trusting disposition that he would be an easy prey
to sharpers. Grandmother begged him to stay among kindly, Christian
people, where he was known; but there was no reasoning with him. He wanted
to be a prospector. He thought a silver mine was waiting for him in
Colorado.

Jake and Otto served us to the last. They moved us into town, put down the
carpets in our new house, made shelves and cupboards for grandmotherâ€™s
kitchen, and seemed loath to leave us. But at last they went, without
warning. Those two fellows had been faithful to us through sun and storm,
had given us things that cannot be bought in any market in the world. With
me they had been like older brothers; had restrained their speech and
manners out of care for me, and given me so much good comradeship. Now
they got on the west-bound train one morning, in their Sunday clothes,
with their oilcloth valisesâ€”and I never saw them again. Months afterward
we got a card from Otto, saying that Jake had been down with mountain
fever, but now they were both working in the Yankee Girl mine, and were
doing well. I wrote to them at that address, but my letter was returned to
me, â€œunclaimed.â€ After that we never heard from them.

Black Hawk, the new world in which we had come to live, was a clean,
well-planted little prairie town, with white fences and good green yards
about the dwellings, wide, dusty streets, and shapely little trees growing
along the wooden sidewalks. In the center of the town there were two rows
of new brick â€œstoreâ€ buildings, a brick schoolhouse, the courthouse, and
four white churches. Our own house looked down over the town, and from our
upstairs windows we could see the winding line of the river bluffs, two
miles south of us. That river was to be my compensation for the lost
freedom of the farming country.

We came to Black Hawk in March, and by the end of April we felt like town
people. Grandfather was a deacon in the new Baptist Church, grandmother
was busy with church suppers and missionary societies, and I was quite
another boy, or thought I was. Suddenly put down among boys of my own age,
I found I had a great deal to learn. Before the spring term of school was
over I could fight, play â€œkeeps,â€ tease the little girls, and use
forbidden words as well as any boy in my class. I was restrained from
utter savagery only by the fact that Mrs. Harling, our nearest neighbor,
kept an eye on me, and if my behavior went beyond certain bounds I was not
permitted to come into her yard or to play with her jolly children.

We saw more of our country neighbors now than when we lived on the farm.
Our house was a convenient stopping-place for them. We had a big barn
where the farmers could put up their teams, and their women-folk more
often accompanied them, now that they could stay with us for dinner, and
rest and set their bonnets right before they went shopping. The more our
house was like a country hotel, the better I liked it. I was glad, when I
came home from school at noon, to see a farm wagon standing in the back
yard, and I was always ready to run downtown to get beefsteak or bakerâ€™s
bread for unexpected company. All through that first spring and summer I
kept hoping that Ambrosch would bring Antonia and Yulka to see our new
house. I wanted to show them our red plush furniture, and the
trumpet-blowing cherubs the German paper-hanger had put on our parlor
ceiling.

When Ambrosch came to town, however, he came alone, and though he put his
horses in our barn, he would never stay for dinner, or tell us anything
about his mother and sisters. If we ran out and questioned him as he was
slipping through the yard, he would merely work his shoulders about in his
coat and say, â€œThey all right, I guess.â€

Mrs. Steavens, who now lived on our farm, grew as fond of Antonia as we
had been, and always brought us news of her. All through the wheat season,
she told us, Ambrosch hired his sister out like a man, and she went from
farm to farm, binding sheaves or working with the thrashers. The farmers
liked her and were kind to her; said they would rather have her for a hand
than Ambrosch. When fall came she was to husk corn for the neighbors until
Christmas, as she had done the year before; but grandmother saved her from
this by getting her a place to work with our neighbors, the Harlings.




II


GRANDMOTHER often said that if she had to live in town, she thanked God
she lived next the Harlings. They had been farming people, like ourselves,
and their place was like a little farm, with a big barn and a garden, and
an orchard and grazing lots,â€”even a windmill. The Harlings were
Norwegians, and Mrs. Harling had lived in Christiania until she was ten
years old. Her husband was born in Minnesota. He was a grain merchant and
cattle buyer, and was generally considered the most enterprising business
man in our county. He controlled a line of grain elevators in the little
towns along the railroad to the west of us, and was away from home a great
deal. In his absence his wife was the head of the household.

Mrs. Harling was short and square and sturdy-looking, like her house.
Every inch of her was charged with an energy that made itself felt the
moment she entered a room. Her face was rosy and solid, with bright,
twinkling eyes and a stubborn little chin. She was quick to anger, quick
to laughter, and jolly from the depths of her soul. How well I remember
her laugh; it had in it the same sudden recognition that flashed into her
eyes, was a burst of humor, short and intelligent. Her rapid footsteps
shook her own floors, and she routed lassitude and indifference wherever
she came. She could not be negative or perfunctory about anything. Her
enthusiasm, and her violent likes and dislikes, asserted themselves in all
the every-day occupations of life. Wash-day was interesting, never dreary,
at the Harlingsâ€™. Preserving-time was a prolonged festival, and
house-cleaning was like a revolution. When Mrs. Harling made garden that
spring, we could feel the stir of her undertaking through the willow hedge
that separated our place from hers.

Three of the Harling children were near me in age. Charley, the only
son,â€”they had lost an older boy,â€”was sixteen; Julia, who was known as the
musical one, was fourteen when I was; and Sally, the tomboy with short
hair, was a year younger. She was nearly as strong as I, and uncannily
clever at all boysâ€™ sports. Sally was a wild thing, with sunburned yellow
hair, bobbed about her ears, and a brown skin, for she never wore a hat.
She raced all over town on one roller skate, often cheated at â€œkeeps,â€ but
was such a quick shot one could nâ€™t catch her at it.

The grown-up daughter, Frances, was a very important person in our world.
She was her fatherâ€™s chief clerk, and virtually managed his Black Hawk
office during his frequent absences. Because of her unusual business
ability, he was stern and exacting with her. He paid her a good salary,
but she had few holidays and never got away from her responsibilities.
Even on Sundays she went to the office to open the mail and read the
markets. With Charley, who was not interested in business, but was already
preparing for Annapolis, Mr. Harling was very indulgent; bought him guns
and tools and electric batteries, and never asked what he did with them.

Frances was dark, like her father, and quite as tall. In winter she wore a
sealskin coat and cap, and she and Mr. Harling used to walk home together
in the evening, talking about grain-cars and cattle, like two men.
Sometimes she came over to see grandfather after supper, and her visits
flattered him. More than once they put their wits together to rescue some
unfortunate farmer from the clutches of Wick Cutter, the Black Hawk
money-lender. Grandfather said Frances Harling was as good a judge of
credits as any banker in the county. The two or three men who had tried to
take advantage of her in a deal acquired celebrity by their defeat. She
knew every farmer for miles about; how much land he had under cultivation,
how many cattle he was feeding, what his liabilities were. Her interest in
these people was more than a business interest. She carried them all in
her mind as if they were characters in a book or a play.

When Frances drove out into the country on business, she would go miles
out of her way to call on some of the old people, or to see the women who
seldom got to town. She was quick at understanding the grandmothers who
spoke no English, and the most reticent and distrustful of them would tell
her their story without realizing they were doing so. She went to country
funerals and weddings in all weathers. A farmerâ€™s daughter who was to be
married could count on a wedding present from Frances Harling.

In August the Harlingsâ€™ Danish cook had to leave them. Grandmother
entreated them to try Antonia. She cornered Ambrosch the next time he came
to town, and pointed out to him that any connection with Christian Harling
would strengthen his credit and be of advantage to him. One Sunday Mrs.
Harling took the long ride out to the Shimerdasâ€™ with Frances. She said
she wanted to see â€œwhat the girl came fromâ€ and to have a clear
understanding with her mother. I was in our yard when they came driving
home, just before sunset. They laughed and waved to me as they passed, and
I could see they were in great good humor. After supper, when grandfather
set off to church, grandmother and I took my short cut through the willow
hedge and went over to hear about the visit to the Shimerdas.

We found Mrs. Harling with Charley and Sally on the front porch, resting
after her hard drive. Julia was in the hammockâ€”she was fond of reposeâ€”and
Frances was at the piano, playing without a light and talking to her
mother through the open window.

Mrs. Harling laughed when she saw us coming. â€œI expect you left your
dishes on the table to-night, Mrs. Burden,â€ she called. Frances shut the
piano and came out to join us.

They had liked Antonia from their first glimpse of her; felt they knew
exactly what kind of girl she was. As for Mrs. Shimerda, they found her
very amusing. Mrs. Harling chuckled whenever she spoke of her. â€œI expect I
am more at home with that sort of bird than you are, Mrs. Burden. Theyâ€™re
a pair, Ambrosch and that old woman!â€

They had had a long argument with Ambrosch about Antoniaâ€™s allowance for
clothes and pocket-money. It was his plan that every cent of his sisterâ€™s
wages should be paid over to him each month, and he would provide her with
such clothing as he thought necessary. When Mrs. Harling told him firmly
that she would keep fifty dollars a year for Antoniaâ€™s own use, he
declared they wanted to take his sister to town and dress her up and make
a fool of her. Mrs. Harling gave us a lively account of Ambroschâ€™s
behavior throughout the interview; how he kept jumping up and putting on
his cap as if he were through with the whole business, and how his mother
tweaked his coat-tail and prompted him in Bohemian. Mrs. Harling finally
agreed to pay three dollars a week for Antoniaâ€™s servicesâ€”good wages in
those daysâ€”and to keep her in shoes. There had been hot dispute about the
shoes, Mrs. Shimerda finally saying persuasively that she would send Mrs.
Harling three fat geese every year to â€œmake even.â€ Ambrosch was to bring
his sister to town next Saturday.

â€œSheâ€™ll be awkward and rough at first, like enough,â€ grandmother said
anxiously, â€œbut unless sheâ€™s been spoiled by the hard life sheâ€™s led, she
has it in her to be a real helpful girl.â€

Mrs. Harling laughed her quick, decided laugh. â€œOh, Iâ€™m not worrying, Mrs.
Burden! I can bring something out of that girl. Sheâ€™s barely seventeen,
not too old to learn new ways. Sheâ€™s good-looking, too!â€ she added warmly.

Frances turned to grandmother. â€œOh, yes, Mrs. Burden, you did nâ€™t tell us
that! She was working in the garden when we got there, barefoot and
ragged. But she has such fine brown legs and arms, and splendid color in
her cheeksâ€”like those big dark red plums.â€

We were pleased at this praise. Grandmother spoke feelingly. â€œWhen she
first came to this country, Frances, and had that genteel old man to watch
over her, she was as pretty a girl as ever I saw. But, dear me, what a
life sheâ€™s led, out in the fields with those rough thrashers! Things would
have been very different with poor Antonia if her father had lived.â€

The Harlings begged us to tell them about Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s death and the big
snowstorm. By the time we saw grandfather coming home from church we had
told them pretty much all we knew of the Shimerdas.

â€œThe girl will be happy here, and sheâ€™ll forget those things,â€ said Mrs.
Harling confidently, as we rose to take our leave.




III


ON Saturday Ambrosch drove up to the back gate, and Antonia jumped down
from the wagon and ran into our kitchen just as she used to do. She was
wearing shoes and stockings, and was breathless and excited. She gave me a
playful shake by the shoulders. â€œYou ainâ€™t forget about me, Jim ?â€

Grandmother kissed her. â€œGod bless you, child! Now youâ€™ve come, you must
try to do right and be a credit to us.â€

Antonia looked eagerly about the house and admired everything. â€œMaybe I be
the kind of girl you like better, now I come to town,â€ she suggested
hopefully.

How good it was to have Antonia near us again; to see her every day and
almost every night! Her greatest fault, Mrs. Harling found, was that she
so often stopped her work and fell to playing with the children. She would
race about the orchard with us, or take sides in our hay-fights in the
barn, or be the old bear that came down from the mountain and carried off
Nina. Tony learned English so quickly that by the time school began she
could speak as well as any of us.

I was jealous of Tonyâ€™s admiration for Charley Harling. Because he was
always first in his classes at school, and could mend the water-pipes or
the door-bell and take the clock to pieces, she seemed to think him a sort
of prince. Nothing that Charley wanted was too much trouble for her. She
loved to put up lunches for him when he went hunting, to mend his
ball-gloves and sew buttons on his shooting-coat, baked the kind of
nut-cake he liked, and fed his setter dog when he was away on trips with
his father. Antonia had made herself cloth working-slippers out of Mr.
Harlingâ€™s old coats, and in these she went padding about after Charley,
fairly panting with eagerness to please him.

Next to Charley, I think she loved Nina best. Nina was only six, and she
was rather more complex than the other children. She was fanciful, had all
sorts of unspoken preferences, and was easily offended. At the slightest
disappointment or displeasure her velvety brown eyes filled with tears,
and she would lift her chin and walk silently away. If we ran after her
and tried to appease her, it did no good. She walked on unmollified. I
used to think that no eyes in the world could grow so large or hold so
many tears as Ninaâ€™s. Mrs. Harling and Antonia invariably took her part.
We were never given a chance to explain. The charge was simply: â€œYou have
made Nina cry. Now, Jimmy can go home, and Sally must get her arithmetic.â€
I liked Nina, too; she was so quaint and unexpected, and her eyes were
lovely; but I often wanted to shake her.

We had jolly evenings at the Harlings when the father was away. If he was
at home, the children had to go to bed early, or they came over to my
house to play. Mr. Harling not only demanded a quiet house, he demanded
all his wifeâ€™s attention. He used to take her away to their room in the
west ell, and talk over his business with her all evening. Though we did
not realize it then, Mrs. Harling was our audience when we played, and we
always looked to her for suggestions. Nothing flattered one like her quick
laugh.

Mr. Harling had a desk in his bedroom, and his own easy-chair by the
window, in which no one else ever sat. On the nights when he was at home,
I could see his shadow on the blind, and it seemed to me an arrogant
shadow. Mrs. Harling paid no heed to any one else if he was there. Before
he went to bed she always got him a lunch of smoked salmon or anchovies
and beer. He kept an alcohol lamp in his room, and a French coffee-pot,
and his wife made coffee for him at any hour of the night he happened to
want it.

Most Black Hawk fathers had no personal habits outside their domestic
ones; they paid the bills, pushed the baby carriage after office hours,
moved the sprinkler about over the lawn, and took the family driving on
Sunday. Mr. Harling, therefore, seemed to me autocratic and imperial in
his ways. He walked, talked, put on his gloves, shook hands, like a man
who felt that he had power. He was not tall, but he carried his head so
haughtily that he looked a commanding figure, and there was something
daring and challenging in his eyes. I used to imagine that the â€œnoblesâ€ of
whom Antonia was always talking probably looked very much like Christian
Harling, wore caped overcoats like his, and just such a glittering diamond
upon the little finger.

Except when the father was at home, the Harling house was never quiet.
Mrs. Harling and Nina and Antonia made as much noise as a houseful of
children, and there was usually somebody at the piano. Julia was the only
one who was held down to regular hours of practicing, but they all played.
When Frances came home at noon, she played until dinner was ready. When
Sally got back from school, she sat down in her hat and coat and drummed
the plantation melodies that negro minstrel troupes brought to town. Even
Nina played the Swedish Wedding March.

Mrs. Harling had studied the piano under a good teacher, and somehow she
managed to practice every day. I soon learned that if I were sent over on
an errand and found Mrs. Harling at the piano, I must sit down and wait
quietly until she turned to me. I can see her at this moment; her short,
square person planted firmly on the stool, her little fat hands moving
quickly and neatly over the keys, her eyes fixed on the music with
intelligent concentration.




IV


  â€œI wonâ€™t have none of your weevily wheat, and I wonâ€™t have none of your
              barley,
  But Iâ€™ll take a measure of fine white flour, to make a cake for
              Charley.â€

WE were singing rhymes to tease Antonia while she was beating up one of
Charleyâ€™s favorite cakes in her big mixing-bowl. It was a crisp autumn
evening, just cold enough to make one glad to quit playing tag in the
yard, and retreat into the kitchen. We had begun to roll popcorn balls
with syrup when we heard a knock at the back door, and Tony dropped her
spoon and went to open it. A plump, fair-skinned girl was standing in the
doorway. She looked demure and pretty, and made a graceful picture in her
blue cashmere dress and little blue hat, with a plaid shawl drawn neatly
about her shoulders and a clumsy pocketbook in her hand.

â€œHello, Tony. Donâ€™t you know me ?â€ she asked in a smooth, low voice,
looking in at us archly.

Antonia gasped and stepped back. â€œWhy, itâ€™s Lena! Of course I did nâ€™t know
you, so dressed up!â€

Lena Lingard laughed, as if this pleased her. I had not recognized her for
a moment, either. I had never seen her before with a hat on her headâ€”or
with shoes and stockings on her feet, for that matter. And here she was,
brushed and smoothed and dressed like a town girl, smiling at us with
perfect composure.

â€œHello, Jim,â€ she said carelessly as she walked into the kitchen and
looked about her. â€œIâ€™ve come to town to work, too, Tony.â€

â€œHave you, now ? Well, ainâ€™t that funny!â€ Antonia stood ill at ease, and
did nâ€™t seem to know just what to do with her visitor.

The door was open into the dining-room, where Mrs. Harling sat crocheting
and Frances was reading. Frances asked Lena to come in and join them.

â€œYou are Lena Lingard, are nâ€™t you ? Iâ€™ve been to see your mother, but you
were off herding cattle that day. Mama, this is Chris Lingardâ€™s oldest
girl.â€

Mrs. Harling dropped her worsted and examined the visitor with quick, keen
eyes. Lena was not at all disconcerted. She sat down in the chair Frances
pointed out, carefully arranging her pocketbook and gray cotton gloves on
her lap. We followed with our popcorn, but Antonia hung backâ€”said she had
to get her cake into the oven.

â€œSo you have come to town,â€ said Mrs. Harling, her eyes still fixed on
Lena. â€œWhere are you working ?â€

â€œFor Mrs. Thomas, the dressmaker. She is going to teach me to sew. She
says I have quite a knack. Iâ€™m through with the farm. There ainâ€™t any end
to the work on a farm, and always so much trouble happens. Iâ€™m going to be
a dressmaker.â€

â€œWell, there have to be dressmakers. Itâ€™s a good trade. But I would nâ€™t
run down the farm, if I were you,â€ said Mrs. Harling rather severely. â€œHow
is your mother ?â€

â€œOh, motherâ€™s never very well; she has too much to do. Sheâ€™d get away from
the farm, too, if she could. She was willing for me to come. After I learn
to do sewing, I can make money and help her.â€

â€œSee that you donâ€™t forget to,â€ said Mrs. Harling skeptically, as she took
up her crocheting again and sent the hook in and out with nimble fingers.

â€œNo, â€™m, I wonâ€™t,â€ said Lena blandly. She took a few grains of the popcorn
we pressed upon her, eating them discreetly and taking care not to get her
fingers sticky.

Frances drew her chair up nearer to the visitor. â€œI thought you were going
to be married, Lena,â€ she said teasingly. â€œDid nâ€™t I hear that Nick
Svendsen was rushing you pretty hard ?â€

Lena looked up with her curiously innocent smile. â€œHe did go with me quite
a while. But his father made a fuss about it and said he would nâ€™t give
Nick any land if he married me, so heâ€™s going to marry Annie Iverson. I
would nâ€™t like to be her; Nickâ€™s awful sullen, and heâ€™ll take it out on
her. He ainâ€™t spoke to his father since he promised.â€

Frances laughed. â€œAnd how do you feel about it ?â€

â€œI donâ€™t want to marry Nick, or any other man,â€ Lena murmured. â€œIâ€™ve seen
a good deal of married life, and I donâ€™t care for it. I want to be so I
can help my mother and the children at home, and not have to ask lief of
anybody.â€

â€œThatâ€™s right,â€ said Frances. â€œAnd Mrs. Thomas thinks you can learn
dressmaking ?â€

â€œYes, â€™m. Iâ€™ve always liked to sew, but I never had much to do with. Mrs.
Thomas makes lovely things for all the town ladies. Did you know Mrs.
Gardener is having a purple velvet made ? The velvet came from Omaha. My,
but itâ€™s lovely!â€ Lena sighed softly and stroked her cashmere folds. â€œTony
knows I never did like out-of-door work,â€ she added.

Mrs. Harling glanced at her. â€œI expect youâ€™ll learn to sew all right,
Lena, if youâ€™ll only keep your head and not go gadding about to dances all
the time and neglect your work, the way some country girls do.â€

â€œYes, â€™m. Tiny Soderball is coming to town, too. Sheâ€™s going to work at
the Boysâ€™ Home Hotel. Sheâ€™ll see lots of strangers,â€ Lena added wistfully.

â€œToo many, like enough,â€ said Mrs. Harling. â€œI donâ€™t think a hotel is a
good place for a girl; though I guess Mrs. Gardener keeps an eye on her
waitresses.â€

Lenaâ€™s candid eyes, that always looked a little sleepy under their long
lashes, kept straying about the cheerful rooms with naÃ¯ve admiration.
Presently she drew on her cotton gloves. â€œI guess I must be leaving,â€ she
said irresolutely.

Frances told her to come again, whenever she was lonesome or wanted advice
about anything. Lena replied that she did nâ€™t believe she would ever get
lonesome in Black Hawk.

She lingered at the kitchen door and begged Antonia to come and see her
often. â€œIâ€™ve got a room of my own at Mrs. Thomasâ€™s, with a carpet.â€

Tony shuffled uneasily in her cloth slippers. â€œIâ€™ll come sometime, but
Mrs. Harling donâ€™t like to have me run much,â€ she said evasively.

â€œYou can do what you please when you go out, canâ€™t you ?â€ Lena asked in a
guarded whisper. â€œAinâ€™t you crazy about town, Tony ? I donâ€™t care what
anybody says, Iâ€™m done with the farm!â€ She glanced back over her shoulder
toward the dining-room, where Mrs. Harling sat.

When Lena was gone, Frances asked Antonia why she had nâ€™t been a little
more cordial to her.

â€œI did nâ€™t know if your mother would like her coming here,â€ said Antonia,
looking troubled. â€œShe was kind of talked about, out there.â€

â€œYes, I know. But mother wonâ€™t hold it against her if she behaves well
here. You need nâ€™t say anything about that to the children. I guess Jim
has heard all that gossip ?â€

When I nodded, she pulled my hair and told me I knew too much, anyhow. We
were good friends, Frances and I.

I ran home to tell grandmother that Lena Lingard had come to town. We were
glad of it, for she had a hard life on the farm.

Lena lived in the Norwegian settlement west of Squaw Creek, and she used
to herd her fatherâ€™s cattle in the open country between his place and the
Shimerdasâ€™. Whenever we rode over in that direction we saw her out among
her cattle, bareheaded and barefooted, scantily dressed in tattered
clothing, always knitting as she watched her herd. Before I knew Lena, I
thought of her as something wild, that always lived on the prairie,
because I had never seen her under a roof. Her yellow hair was burned to a
ruddy thatch on her head; but her legs and arms, curiously enough, in
spite of constant exposure to the sun, kept a miraculous whiteness which
somehow made her seem more undressed than other girls who went scantily
clad. The first time I stopped to talk to her, I was astonished at her
soft voice and easy, gentle ways. The girls out there usually got rough
and mannish after they went to herding. But Lena asked Jake and me to get
off our horses and stay awhile, and behaved exactly as if she were in a
house and were accustomed to having visitors. She was not embarrassed by
her ragged clothes, and treated us as if we were old acquaintances. Even
then I noticed the unusual color of her eyesâ€”a shade of deep violetâ€”and
their soft, confiding expression.

Chris Lingard was not a very successful farmer, and he had a large family.
Lena was always knitting stockings for little brothers and sisters, and
even the Norwegian women, who disapproved of her, admitted that she was a
good daughter to her mother. As Tony said, she had been talked about. She
was accused of making Ole Benson lose the little sense he hadâ€”and that at
an age when she should still have been in pinafores.

             [Illustration: Lena Lingard knitting stockings]

Ole lived in a leaky dugout somewhere at the edge of the settlement. He
was fat and lazy and discouraged, and bad luck had become a habit with
him. After he had had every other kind of misfortune, his wife, â€œCrazy
Mary,â€ tried to set a neighborâ€™s barn on fire, and was sent to the asylum
at Lincoln. She was kept there for a few months, then escaped and walked
all the way home, nearly two hundred miles, traveling by night and hiding
in barns and haystacks by day. When she got back to the Norwegian
settlement, her poor feet were as hard as hoofs. She promised to be good,
and was allowed to stay at homeâ€”though every one realized she was as crazy
as ever, and she still ran about barefooted through the snow, telling her
domestic troubles to her neighbors.

Not long after Mary came back from the asylum, I heard a young Dane, who
was helping us to thrash, tell Jake and Otto that Chris Lingardâ€™s oldest
girl had put Ole Benson out of his head, until he had no more sense than
his crazy wife. When Ole was cultivating his corn that summer, he used to
get discouraged in the field, tie up his team, and wander off to wherever
Lena Lingard was herding. There he would sit down on the draw-side and
help her watch her cattle. All the settlement was talking about it. The
Norwegian preacherâ€™s wife went to Lena and told her she ought not to allow
this; she begged Lena to come to church on Sundays. Lena said she had nâ€™t
a dress in the world any less ragged than the one on her back. Then the
ministerâ€™s wife went through her old trunks and found some things she had
worn before her marriage.

The next Sunday Lena appeared at church, a little late, with her hair done
up neatly on her head, like a young woman, wearing shoes and stockings,
and the new dress, which she had made over for herself very becomingly.
The congregation stared at her. Until that morning no oneâ€”unless it were
Oleâ€”had realized how pretty she was, or that she was growing up. The
swelling lines of her figure had been hidden under the shapeless rags she
wore in the fields. After the last hymn had been sung, and the
congregation was dismissed, Ole slipped out to the hitch-bar and lifted
Lena on her horse. That, in itself, was shocking; a married man was not
expected to do such things. But it was nothing to the scene that followed.
Crazy Mary darted out from the group of women at the church door, and ran
down the road after Lena, shouting horrible threats.

â€œLook out, you Lena Lingard, look out! Iâ€™ll come over with a corn-knife
one day and trim some of that shape off you. Then you wonâ€™t sail round so
fine, making eyes at the men! â€¦â€

The Norwegian women did nâ€™t know where to look. They were formal
housewives, most of them, with a severe sense of decorum. But Lena Lingard
only laughed her lazy, good-natured laugh and rode on, gazing back over
her shoulder at Oleâ€™s infuriated wife.

The time came, however, when Lena did nâ€™t laugh. More than once Crazy Mary
chased her across the prairie and round and round the Shimerdasâ€™
cornfield. Lena never told her father; perhaps she was ashamed; perhaps
she was more afraid of his anger than of the corn-knife. I was at the
Shimerdasâ€™ one afternoon when Lena came bounding through the red grass as
fast as her white legs could carry her. She ran straight into the house
and hid in Antoniaâ€™s feather-bed. Mary was not far behind; she came right
up to the door and made us feel how sharp her blade was, showing us very
graphically just what she meant to do to Lena. Mrs. Shimerda, leaning out
of the window, enjoyed the situation keenly, and was sorry when Antonia
sent Mary away, mollified by an apronful of bottle-tomatoes. Lena came out
from Tonyâ€™s room behind the kitchen, very pink from the heat of the
feathers, but otherwise calm. She begged Antonia and me to go with her,
and help get her cattle together; they were scattered and might be gorging
themselves in somebodyâ€™s cornfield.

â€œMaybe you lose a steer and learn not to make somethings with your eyes at
married men,â€ Mrs. Shimerda told her hectoringly.

Lena only smiled her sleepy smile. â€œI never made anything to him with my
eyes. I canâ€™t help it if he hangs around, and I canâ€™t order him off. It
ainâ€™t my prairie.â€




V


AFTER Lena came to Black Hawk I often met her downtown, where she would be
matching sewing silk or buying â€œfindingsâ€ for Mrs. Thomas. If I happened
to walk home with her, she told me all about the dresses she was helping
to make, or about what she saw and heard when she was with Tiny Soderball
at the hotel on Saturday nights.

The Boysâ€™ Home was the best hotel on our branch of the Burlington, and all
the commercial travelers in that territory tried to get into Black Hawk
for Sunday. They used to assemble in the parlor after supper on Saturday
nights. Marshall Fieldâ€™s man, Anson Kirkpatrick, played the piano and sang
all the latest sentimental songs. After Tiny had helped the cook wash the
dishes, she and Lena sat on the other side of the double doors between the
parlor and the dining-room, listening to the music and giggling at the
jokes and stories. Lena often said she hoped I would be a traveling man
when I grew up. They had a gay life of it; nothing to do but ride about on
trains all day and go to theaters when they were in big cities. Behind the
hotel there was an old store building, where the salesmen opened their big
trunks and spread out their samples on the counters. The Black Hawk
merchants went to look at these things and order goods, and Mrs. Thomas,
though she was â€œretail trade,â€ was permitted to see them and to â€œget
ideas.â€ They were all generous, these traveling men; they gave Tiny
Soderball handkerchiefs and gloves and ribbons and striped stockings, and
so many bottles of perfume and cakes of scented soap that she bestowed
some of them on Lena.

One afternoon in the week before Christmas I came upon Lena and her funny,
square-headed little brother Chris, standing before the drug-store, gazing
in at the wax dolls and blocks and Noahâ€™s arks arranged in the frosty show
window. The boy had come to town with a neighbor to do his Christmas
shopping, for he had money of his own this year. He was only twelve, but
that winter he had got the job of sweeping out the Norwegian church and
making the fire in it every Sunday morning. A cold job it must have been,
too!

We went into Duckfordâ€™s dry-goods store, and Chris unwrapped all his
presents and showed them to meâ€”something for each of the six younger than
himself, even a rubber pig for the baby. Lena had given him one of Tiny
Soderballâ€™s bottles of perfume for his mother, and he thought he would get
some handkerchiefs to go with it. They were cheap, and he had nâ€™t much
money left. We found a tableful of handkerchiefs spread out for view at
Duckfordâ€™s. Chris wanted those with initial letters in the corner, because
he had never seen any before. He studied them seriously, while Lena looked
over his shoulder, telling him she thought the red letters would hold
their color best. He seemed so perplexed that I thought perhaps he had nâ€™t
enough money, after all. Presently he said gravely,â€”

â€œSister, you know motherâ€™s name is Berthe. I donâ€™t know if I ought to get
B for Berthe, or M for Mother.â€

Lena patted his bristly head. â€œIâ€™d get the B, Chrissy. It will please her
for you to think about her name. Nobody ever calls her by it now.â€

That satisfied him. His face cleared at once, and he took three reds and
three blues. When the neighbor came in to say that it was time to start,
Lena wound Chrisâ€™s comforter about his neck and turned up his jacket
collarâ€”he had no overcoatâ€”and we watched him climb into the wagon and
start on his long, cold drive. As we walked together up the windy street,
Lena wiped her eyes with the back of her woolen glove. â€œI get awful
homesick for them, all the same,â€ she murmured, as if she were answering
some remembered reproach.




VI


WINTER comes down savagely over a little town on the prairie. The wind
that sweeps in from the open country strips away all the leafy screens
that hide one yard from another in summer, and the houses seem to draw
closer together. The roofs, that looked so far away across the green
tree-tops, now stare you in the face, and they are so much uglier than
when their angles were softened by vines and shrubs.

In the morning, when I was fighting my way to school against the wind, I
could nâ€™t see anything but the road in front of me; but in the late
afternoon, when I was coming home, the town looked bleak and desolate to
me. The pale, cold light of the winter sunset did not beautifyâ€”it was like
the light of truth itself. When the smoky clouds hung low in the west and
the red sun went down behind them, leaving a pink flush on the snowy roofs
and the blue drifts, then the wind sprang up afresh, with a kind of bitter
song, as if it said: â€œThis is reality, whether you like it or not. All
those frivolities of summer, the light and shadow, the living mask of
green that trembled over everything, they were lies, and this is what was
underneath. This is the truth.â€ It was as if we were being punished for
loving the loveliness of summer.

If I loitered on the playground after school, or went to the post-office
for the mail and lingered to hear the gossip about the cigar-stand, it
would be growing dark by the time I came home. The sun was gone; the
frozen streets stretched long and blue before me; the lights were shining
pale in kitchen windows, and I could smell the suppers cooking as I
passed. Few people were abroad, and each one of them was hurrying toward a
fire. The glowing stoves in the houses were like magnets. When one passed
an old man, one could see nothing of his face but a red nose sticking out
between a frosted beard and a long plush cap. The young men capered along
with their hands in their pockets, and sometimes tried a slide on the icy
sidewalk. The children, in their bright hoods and comforters, never
walked, but always ran from the moment they left their door, beating their
mittens against their sides. When I got as far as the Methodist Church, I
was about halfway home. I can remember how glad I was when there happened
to be a light in the church, and the painted glass window shone out at us
as we came along the frozen street. In the winter bleakness a hunger for
color came over people, like the Laplanderâ€™s craving for fats and sugar.
Without knowing why, we used to linger on the sidewalk outside the church
when the lamps were lighted early for choir practice or prayer-meeting,
shivering and talking until our feet were like lumps of ice. The crude
reds and greens and blues of that colored glass held us there.

On winter nights, the lights in the Harlingsâ€™ windows drew me like the
painted glass. Inside that warm, roomy house there was color, too. After
supper I used to catch up my cap, stick my hands in my pockets, and dive
through the willow hedge as if witches were after me. Of course, if Mr.
Harling was at home, if his shadow stood out on the blind of the west
room, I did not go in, but turned and walked home by the long way, through
the street, wondering what book I should read as I sat down with the two
old people.

Such disappointments only gave greater zest to the nights when we acted
charades, or had a costume ball in the back parlor, with Sally always
dressed like a boy. Frances taught us to dance that winter, and she said,
from the first lesson, that Antonia would make the best dancer among us.
On Saturday nights, Mrs. Harling used to play the old operas for
us,â€”â€œMartha,â€ â€œNorma,â€ â€œRigoletto,â€â€”telling us the story while she played.
Every Saturday night was like a party. The parlor, the back parlor, and
the dining-room were warm and brightly lighted, with comfortable chairs
and sofas, and gay pictures on the walls. One always felt at ease there.
Antonia brought her sewing and sat with usâ€”she was already beginning to
make pretty clothes for herself. After the long winter evenings on the
prairie, with Ambroschâ€™s sullen silences and her motherâ€™s complaints, the
Harlingsâ€™ house seemed, as she said, â€œlike Heavenâ€ to her. She was never
too tired to make taffy or chocolate cookies for us. If Sally whispered in
her ear, or Charley gave her three winks, Tony would rush into the kitchen
and build a fire in the range on which she had already cooked three meals
that day.

While we sat in the kitchen waiting for the cookies to bake or the taffy
to cool, Nina used to coax Antonia to tell her storiesâ€”about the calf that
broke its leg, or how Yulka saved her little turkeys from drowning in the
freshet, or about old Christmases and weddings in Bohemia. Nina
interpreted the stories about the crÃªche fancifully, and in spite of our
derision she cherished a belief that Christ was born in Bohemia a short
time before the Shimerdas left that country. We all liked Tonyâ€™s stories.
Her voice had a peculiarly engaging quality; it was deep, a little husky,
and one always heard the breath vibrating behind it. Everything she said
seemed to come right out of her heart.

One evening when we were picking out kernels for walnut taffy, Tony told
us a new story.

â€œMrs. Harling, did you ever hear about what happened up in the Norwegian
settlement last summer, when I was thrashing there ? We were at Iversonsâ€™,
and I was driving one of the grain wagons.â€

Mrs. Harling came out and sat down among us. â€œCould you throw the wheat
into the bin yourself, Tony ?â€ She knew what heavy work it was.

â€œYes, mam, I did. I could shovel just as fast as that fat Andern boy that
drove the other wagon. One day it was just awful hot. When we got back to
the field from dinner, we took things kind of easy. The men put in the
horses and got the machine going, and Ole Iverson was up on the deck,
cutting bands. I was sitting against a straw stack, trying to get some
shade. My wagon was nâ€™t going out first, and somehow I felt the heat awful
that day. The sun was so hot like it was going to burn the world up. After
a while I see a man coming across the stubble, and when he got close I see
it was a tramp. His toes stuck out of his shoes, and he had nâ€™t shaved for
a long while, and his eyes was awful red and wild, like he had some
sickness. He comes right up and begins to talk like he knows me already.
He says: â€˜The ponds in this country is done got so low a man could nâ€™t
drownd himself in one of â€™em.â€™

â€œI told him nobody wanted to drownd themselves, but if we did nâ€™t have
rain soon weâ€™d have to pump water for the cattle.

â€œâ€˜Oh, cattle,â€™ he says, â€˜youâ€™ll all take care of your cattle! Ainâ€™t you
got no beer here ?â€™ I told him heâ€™d have to go to the Bohemians for beer;
the Norwegians did nâ€™t have none when they thrashed. â€˜My God!â€™ he says,
â€˜so itâ€™s Norwegians now, is it ? I thought this was Americy.â€™

â€œThen he goes up to the machine and yells out to Ole Iverson, â€˜Hello,
partner, let me up there. I can cut bands, and Iâ€™m tired of trampinâ€™. I
wonâ€™t go no farther.â€™

â€œI tried to make signs to Ole, â€™cause I thought that man was crazy and
might get the machine stopped up. But Ole, he was glad to get down out of
the sun and chaffâ€”it gets down your neck and sticks to you something awful
when itâ€™s hot like that. So Ole jumped down and crawled under one of the
wagons for shade, and the tramp got on the machine. He cut bands all right
for a few minutes, and then, Mrs. Harling, he waved his hand to me and
jumped head-first right into the thrashing machine after the wheat.

â€œI begun to scream, and the men run to stop the horses, but the belt had
sucked him down, and by the time they got her stopped he was all beat and
cut to pieces. He was wedged in so tight it was a hard job to get him out,
and the machine ainâ€™t never worked right since.â€

â€œWas he clear dead, Tony ?â€ we cried.

â€œWas he dead ? Well, I guess so! There, now, Ninaâ€™s all upset. We wonâ€™t
talk about it. Donâ€™t you cry, Nina. No old tramp wonâ€™t get you while
Tonyâ€™s here.â€

Mrs. Harling spoke up sternly. â€œStop crying, Nina, or Iâ€™ll always send you
upstairs when Antonia tells us about the country. Did they never find out
where he came from, Antonia ?â€

â€œNever, mam. He had nâ€™t been seen nowhere except in a little town they
call Conway. He tried to get beer there, but there was nâ€™t any saloon.
Maybe he came in on a freight, but the brakeman had nâ€™t seen him. They
could nâ€™t find no letters nor nothing on him; nothing but an old penknife
in his pocket and the wishbone of a chicken wrapped up in a piece of
paper, and some poetry.â€

â€œSome poetry ?â€ we exclaimed.

â€œI remember,â€ said Frances. â€œIt was â€˜The Old Oaken Bucket,â€™ cut out of a
newspaper and nearly worn out. Ole Iverson brought it into the office and
showed it to me.â€

â€œNow, was nâ€™t that strange, Miss Frances ?â€ Tony asked thoughtfully. â€œWhat
would anybody want to kill themselves in summer for ? In thrashing time,
too! Itâ€™s nice everywhere then.â€

â€œSo it is, Antonia,â€ said Mrs. Harling heartily. â€œMaybe Iâ€™ll go home and
help you thrash next summer. Is nâ€™t that taffy nearly ready to eat ? Iâ€™ve
been smelling it a long while.â€

There was a basic harmony between Antonia and her mistress. They had
strong, independent natures, both of them. They knew what they liked, and
were not always trying to imitate other people. They loved children and
animals and music, and rough play and digging in the earth. They liked to
prepare rich, hearty food and to see people eat it; to make up soft white
beds and to see youngsters asleep in them. They ridiculed conceited people
and were quick to help unfortunate ones. Deep down in each of them there
was a kind of hearty joviality, a relish of life, not over-delicate, but
very invigorating. I never tried to define it, but I was distinctly
conscious of it. I could not imagine Antoniaâ€™s living for a week in any
other house in Black Hawk than the Harlingsâ€™.




VII


WINTER lies too long in country towns; hangs on until it is stale and
shabby, old and sullen. On the farm the weather was the great fact, and
menâ€™s affairs went on underneath it, as the streams creep under the ice.
But in Black Hawk the scene of human life was spread out shrunken and
pinched, frozen down to the bare stalk.

Through January and February I went to the river with the Harlings on
clear nights, and we skated up to the big island and made bonfires on the
frozen sand. But by March the ice was rough and choppy, and the snow on
the river bluffs was gray and mournful-looking. I was tired of school,
tired of winter clothes, of the rutted streets, of the dirty drifts and
the piles of cinders that had lain in the yards so long. There was only
one break in the dreary monotony of that month; when Blind dâ€™Arnault, the
negro pianist, came to town. He gave a concert at the Opera House on
Monday night, and he and his manager spent Saturday and Sunday at our
comfortable hotel. Mrs. Harling had known dâ€™Arnault for years. She told
Antonia she had better go to see Tiny that Saturday evening, as there
would certainly be music at the Boysâ€™ Home.

Saturday night after supper I ran downtown to the hotel and slipped
quietly into the parlor. The chairs and sofas were already occupied, and
the air smelled pleasantly of cigar smoke. The parlor had once been two
rooms, and the floor was sway-backed where the partition had been cut
away. The wind from without made waves in the long carpet. A coal stove
glowed at either end of the room, and the grand piano in the middle stood
open.

There was an atmosphere of unusual freedom about the house that night, for
Mrs. Gardener had gone to Omaha for a week. Johnnie had been having drinks
with the guests until he was rather absent-minded. It was Mrs. Gardener
who ran the business and looked after everything. Her husband stood at the
desk and welcomed incoming travelers. He was a popular fellow, but no
manager.

Mrs. Gardener was admittedly the best-dressed woman in Black Hawk, drove
the best horse, and had a smart trap and a little white-and-gold sleigh.
She seemed indifferent to her possessions, was not half so solicitous
about them as her friends were. She was tall, dark, severe, with something
Indian-like in the rigid immobility of her face. Her manner was cold, and
she talked little. Guests felt that they were receiving, not conferring, a
favor when they stayed at her house. Even the smartest traveling men were
flattered when Mrs. Gardener stopped to chat with them for a moment. The
patrons of the hotel were divided into two classes; those who had seen
Mrs. Gardenerâ€™s diamonds, and those who had not.

When I stole into the parlor Anson Kirkpatrick, Marshall Fieldâ€™s man, was
at the piano, playing airs from a musical comedy then running in Chicago.
He was a dapper little Irishman, very vain, homely as a monkey, with
friends everywhere, and a sweetheart in every port, like a sailor. I did
not know all the men who were sitting about, but I recognized a furniture
salesman from Kansas City, a drug man, and Willy Oâ€™Reilly, who traveled
for a jewelry house and sold musical instruments. The talk was all about
good and bad hotels, actors and actresses and musical prodigies. I learned
that Mrs. Gardener had gone to Omaha to hear Booth and Barrett, who were
to play there next week, and that Mary Anderson was having a great success
in â€œA Winterâ€™s Tale,â€ in London.

The door from the office opened, and Johnnie Gardener came in, directing
Blind dâ€™Arnault,â€”he would never consent to be led. He was a heavy, bulky
mulatto, on short legs, and he came tapping the floor in front of him with
his gold-headed cane. His yellow face was lifted in the light, with a show
of white teeth, all grinning, and his shrunken, papery eyelids lay
motionless over his blind eyes.

â€œGood evening, gentlemen. No ladies here ? Good-evening, gentlemen. We
going to have a little music ? Some of you gentlemen going to play for me
this evening ?â€ It was the soft, amiable negro voice, like those I
remembered from early childhood, with the note of docile subservience in
it. He had the negro head, too; almost no head at all; nothing behind the
ears but folds of neck under close-clipped wool. He would have been
repulsive if his face had not been so kindly and happy. It was the
happiest face I had seen since I left Virginia.

He felt his way directly to the piano. The moment he sat down, I noticed
the nervous infirmity of which Mrs. Harling had told me. When he was
sitting, or standing still, he swayed back and forth incessantly, like a
rocking toy. At the piano, he swayed in time to the music, and when he was
not playing, his body kept up this motion, like an empty mill grinding on.
He found the pedals and tried them, ran his yellow hands up and down the
keys a few times, tinkling off scales, then turned to the company.

â€œShe seems all right, gentlemen. Nothing happened to her since the last
time I was here. Mrs. Gardener, she always has this piano tuned up before
I come. Now, gentlemen, I expect youâ€™ve all got grand voices. Seems like
we might have some good old plantation songs to-night.â€

The men gathered round him, as he began to play â€œMy Old Kentucky Home.â€
They sang one negro melody after another, while the mulatto sat rocking
himself, his head thrown back, his yellow face lifted, its shriveled
eyelids never fluttering.

He was born in the Far South, on the dâ€™Arnault plantation, where the
spirit if not the fact of slavery persisted. When he was three weeks old
he had an illness which left him totally blind. As soon as he was old
enough to sit up alone and toddle about, another affliction, the nervous
motion of his body, became apparent. His mother, a buxom young negro wench
who was laundress for the dâ€™Arnaults, concluded that her blind baby was
â€œnot rightâ€ in his head, and she was ashamed of him. She loved him
devotedly, but he was so ugly, with his sunken eyes and his â€œfidgets,â€
that she hid him away from people. All the dainties she brought down from
the â€œBig Houseâ€ were for the blind child, and she beat and cuffed her
other children whenever she found them teasing him or trying to get his
chicken-bone away from him. He began to talk early, remembered everything
he heard, and his mammy said he â€œwas nâ€™t all wrong.â€ She named him Samson,
because he was blind, but on the plantation he was known as â€œyellow
Marthaâ€™s simple child.â€ He was docile and obedient, but when he was six
years old he began to run away from home, always taking the same
direction. He felt his way through the lilacs, along the boxwood hedge, up
to the south wing of the â€œBig House,â€ where Miss Nellie dâ€™Arnault
practiced the piano every morning. This angered his mother more than
anything else he could have done; she was so ashamed of his ugliness that
she could nâ€™t bear to have white folks see him. Whenever she caught him
slipping away from the cabin, she whipped him unmercifully, and told him
what dreadful things old Mr. dâ€™Arnault would do to him if he ever found
him near the â€œBig House.â€ But the next time Samson had a chance, he ran
away again. If Miss dâ€™Arnault stopped practicing for a moment and went
toward the window, she saw this hideous little pickaninny, dressed in an
old piece of sacking, standing in the open space between the hollyhock
rows, his body rocking automatically, his blind face lifted to the sun and
wearing an expression of idiotic rapture. Often she was tempted to tell
Martha that the child must be kept at home, but somehow the memory of his
foolish, happy face deterred her. She remembered that his sense of hearing
was nearly all he had,â€”though it did not occur to her that he might have
more of it than other children.

One day Samson was standing thus while Miss Nellie was playing her lesson
to her music-master. The windows were open. He heard them get up from the
piano, talk a little while, and then leave the room. He heard the door
close after them. He crept up to the front windows and stuck his head in:
there was no one there. He could always detect the presence of any one in
a room. He put one foot over the window sill and straddled it. His mother
had told him over and over how his master would give him to the big
mastiff if he ever found him â€œmeddling.â€ Samson had got too near the
mastiffâ€™s kennel once, and had felt his terrible breath in his face. He
thought about that, but he pulled in his other foot.

Through the dark he found his way to the Thing, to its mouth. He touched
it softly, and it answered softly, kindly. He shivered and stood still.
Then he began to feel it all over, ran his finger tips along the slippery
sides, embraced the carved legs, tried to get some conception of its shape
and size, of the space it occupied in primeval night. It was cold and
hard, and like nothing else in his black universe. He went back to its
mouth, began at one end of the keyboard and felt his way down into the
mellow thunder, as far as he could go. He seemed to know that it must be
done with the fingers, not with the fists or the feet. He approached this
highly artificial instrument through a mere instinct, and coupled himself
to it, as if he knew it was to piece him out and make a whole creature of
him. After he had tried over all the sounds, he began to finger out
passages from things Miss Nellie had been practicing, passages that were
already his, that lay under the bones of his pinched, conical little
skull, definite as animal desires. The door opened; Miss Nellie and her
music-master stood behind it, but blind Samson, who was so sensitive to
presences, did not know they were there. He was feeling out the pattern
that lay all ready-made on the big and little keys. When he paused for a
moment, because the sound was wrong and he wanted another, Miss Nellie
spoke softly. He whirled about in a spasm of terror, leaped forward in the
dark, struck his head on the open window, and fell screaming and bleeding
to the floor. He had what his mother called a fit. The doctor came and
gave him opium.

When Samson was well again, his young mistress led him back to the piano.
Several teachers experimented with him. They found he had absolute pitch,
and a remarkable memory. As a very young child he could repeat, after a
fashion, any composition that was played for him. No matter how many wrong
notes he struck, he never lost the intention of a passage, he brought the
substance of it across by irregular and astonishing means. He wore his
teachers out. He could never learn like other people, never acquired any
finish. He was always a negro prodigy who played barbarously and
wonderfully. As piano playing, it was perhaps abominable, but as music it
was something real, vitalized by a sense of rhythm that was stronger than
his other physical senses,â€”that not only filled his dark mind, but worried
his body incessantly. To hear him, to watch him, was to see a negro
enjoying himself as only a negro can. It was as if all the agreeable
sensations possible to creatures of flesh and blood were heaped up on
those black and white keys, and he were gloating over them and trickling
them through his yellow fingers.

In the middle of a crashing waltz dâ€™Arnault suddenly began to play softly,
and, turning to one of the men who stood behind him, whispered, â€œSomebody
dancing in there.â€ He jerked his bullet head toward the dining-room. â€œI
hear little feet,â€”girls, I â€™spect.â€

Anson Kirkpatrick mounted a chair and peeped over the transom. Springing
down, he wrenched open the doors and ran out into the dining-room. Tiny
and Lena, Antonia and Mary Dusak, were waltzing in the middle of the
floor. They separated and fled toward the kitchen, giggling.

Kirkpatrick caught Tiny by the elbows. â€œWhatâ€™s the matter with you girls ?
Dancing out here by yourselves, when thereâ€™s a roomful of lonesome men on
the other side of the partition! Introduce me to your friends, Tiny.â€

The girls, still laughing, were trying to escape. Tiny looked alarmed.
â€œMrs. Gardener would nâ€™t like it,â€ she protested. â€œSheâ€™d be awful mad if
you was to come out here and dance with us.â€

â€œMrs. Gardenerâ€™s in Omaha, girl. Now, youâ€™re Lena, are you ?â€”and youâ€™re
Tony and youâ€™re Mary. Have I got you all straight ?â€

Oâ€™Reilly and the others began to pile the chairs on the tables. Johnnie
Gardener ran in from the office.

â€œEasy, boys, easy!â€ he entreated them. â€œYouâ€™ll wake the cook, and thereâ€™ll
be the devil to pay for me. She wonâ€™t hear the music, but sheâ€™ll be down
the minute anythingâ€™s moved in the dining-room.â€

â€œOh, what do you care, Johnnie ? Fire the cook and wire Molly to bring
another. Come along, nobodyâ€™ll tell tales.â€

Johnnie shook his head. â€œâ€™S a fact, boys,â€ he said confidentially. â€œIf I
take a drink in Black Hawk, Molly knows it in Omaha!â€

His guests laughed and slapped him on the shoulder. â€œOh, weâ€™ll make it all
right with Molly. Get your back up, Johnnie.â€

Molly was Mrs. Gardenerâ€™s name, of course. â€œMolly Bawnâ€ was painted in
large blue letters on the glossy white side of the hotel bus, and â€œMollyâ€
was engraved inside Johnnieâ€™s ring and on his watch-caseâ€”doubtless on his
heart, too. He was an affectionate little man, and he thought his wife a
wonderful woman; he knew that without her he would hardly be more than a
clerk in some other manâ€™s hotel.

At a word from Kirkpatrick, dâ€™Arnault spread himself out over the piano,
and began to draw the dance music out of it, while the perspiration shone
on his short wool and on his uplifted face. He looked like some glistening
African god of pleasure, full of strong, savage blood. Whenever the
dancers paused to change partners or to catch breath, he would boom out
softly, â€œWhoâ€™s that goinâ€™ back on me ? One of these city gentlemen, I bet!
Now, you girls, you ainâ€™t goinâ€™ to let that floor get cold ?â€

Antonia seemed frightened at first, and kept looking questioningly at Lena
and Tiny over Willy Oâ€™Reillyâ€™s shoulder. Tiny Soderball was trim and
slender, with lively little feet and pretty anklesâ€”she wore her dresses
very short. She was quicker in speech, lighter in movement and manner than
the other girls. Mary Dusak was broad and brown of countenance, slightly
marked by smallpox, but handsome for all that. She had beautiful chestnut
hair, coils of it; her forehead was low and smooth, and her commanding
dark eyes regarded the world indifferently and fearlessly. She looked bold
and resourceful and unscrupulous, and she was all of these. They were
handsome girls, had the fresh color of their country up-bringing, and in
their eyes that brilliancy which is called,â€”by no metaphor, alas!â€”â€œthe
light of youth.â€

Dâ€™Arnault played until his manager came and shut the piano. Before he left
us, he showed us his gold watch which struck the hours, and a topaz ring,
given him by some Russian nobleman who delighted in negro melodies, and
had heard dâ€™Arnault play in New Orleans. At last he tapped his way
upstairs, after bowing to everybody, docile and happy. I walked home with
Antonia. We were so excited that we dreaded to go to bed. We lingered a
long while at the Harlingsâ€™ gate, whispering in the cold until the
restlessness was slowly chilled out of us.




VIII


THE Harling children and I were never happier, never felt more contented
and secure, than in the weeks of spring which broke that long winter. We
were out all day in the thin sunshine, helping Mrs. Harling and Tony break
the ground and plant the garden, dig around the orchard trees, tie up
vines and clip the hedges. Every morning, before I was up, I could hear
Tony singing in the garden rows. After the apple and cherry trees broke
into bloom, we ran about under them, hunting for the new nests the birds
were building, throwing clods at each other, and playing hide-and-seek
with Nina. Yet the summer which was to change everything was coming nearer
every day. When boys and girls are growing up, life canâ€™t stand still, not
even in the quietest of country towns; and they have to grow up, whether
they will or no. That is what their elders are always forgetting.

It must have been in June, for Mrs. Harling and Antonia were preserving
cherries, when I stopped one morning to tell them that a dancing pavilion
had come to town. I had seen two drays hauling the canvas and painted
poles up from the depot.

That afternoon three cheerful-looking Italians strolled about Black Hawk,
looking at everything, and with them was a dark, stout woman who wore a
long gold watch chain about her neck and carried a black lace parasol.
They seemed especially interested in children and vacant lots. When I
overtook them and stopped to say a word, I found them affable and
confiding. They told me they worked in Kansas City in the winter, and in
summer they went out among the farming towns with their tent and taught
dancing. When business fell off in one place, they moved on to another.

The dancing pavilion was put up near the Danish laundry, on a vacant lot
surrounded by tall, arched cottonwood trees. It was very much like a
merry-go-round tent, with open sides and gay flags flying from the poles.
Before the week was over, all the ambitious mothers were sending their
children to the afternoon dancing class. At three oâ€™clock one met little
girls in white dresses and little boys in the round-collared shirts of the
time, hurrying along the sidewalk on their way to the tent. Mrs. Vanni
received them at the entrance, always dressed in lavender with a great
deal of black lace, her important watch chain lying on her bosom. She wore
her hair on the top of her head, built up in a black tower, with red coral
combs. When she smiled, she showed two rows of strong, crooked yellow
teeth. She taught the little children herself, and her husband, the
harpist, taught the older ones.

Often the mothers brought their fancy-work and sat on the shady side of
the tent during the lesson. The popcorn man wheeled his glass wagon under
the big cottonwood by the door, and lounged in the sun, sure of a good
trade when the dancing was over. Mr. Jensen, the Danish laundryman, used
to bring a chair from his porch and sit out in the grass plot. Some ragged
little boys from the depot sold pop and iced lemonade under a white
umbrella at the corner, and made faces at the spruce youngsters who came
to dance. That vacant lot soon became the most cheerful place in town.
Even on the hottest afternoons the cottonwoods made a rustling shade, and
the air smelled of popcorn and melted butter, and Bouncing Bets wilting in
the sun. Those hardy flowers had run away from the laundrymanâ€™s garden,
and the grass in the middle of the lot was pink with them.

The Vannis kept exemplary order, and closed every evening at the hour
suggested by the City Council. When Mrs. Vanni gave the signal, and the
harp struck up â€œHome, Sweet Home,â€ all Black Hawk knew it was ten oâ€™clock.
You could set your watch by that tune as confidently as by the Round House
whistle.

At last there was something to do in those long, empty summer evenings,
when the married people sat like images on their front porches, and the
boys and girls tramped and tramped the board sidewalksâ€”northward to the
edge of the open prairie, south to the depot, then back again to the
post-office, the ice-cream parlor, the butcher shop. Now there was a place
where the girls could wear their new dresses, and where one could laugh
aloud without being reproved by the ensuing silence. That silence seemed
to ooze out of the ground, to hang under the foliage of the black maple
trees with the bats and shadows. Now it was broken by light-hearted
sounds. First the deep purring of Mr. Vanniâ€™s harp came in silvery ripples
through the blackness of the dusty-smelling night; then the violins fell
inâ€”one of them was almost like a flute. They called so archly, so
seductively, that our feet hurried toward the tent of themselves. Why had
nâ€™t we had a tent before ?

Dancing became popular now, just as roller skating had been the summer
before. The Progressive Euchre Club arranged with the Vannis for the
exclusive use of the floor on Tuesday and Friday nights. At other times
any one could dance who paid his money and was orderly; the railroad men,
the Round House mechanics, the delivery boys, the iceman, the farmhands
who lived near enough to ride into town after their dayâ€™s work was over.

I never missed a Saturday night dance. The tent was open until midnight
then. The country boys came in from farms eight and ten miles away, and
all the country girls were on the floor,â€”Antonia and Lena and Tiny, and
the Danish laundry girls and their friends. I was not the only boy who
found these dances gayer than the others. The young men who belonged to
the Progressive Euchre Club used to drop in late and risk a tiff with
their sweethearts and general condemnation for a waltz with â€œthe hired
girls.â€




IX


THERE was a curious social situation in Black Hawk. All the young men felt
the attraction of the fine, well-set-up country girls who had come to town
to earn a living, and, in nearly every case, to help the father struggle
out of debt, or to make it possible for the younger children of the family
to go to school.

Those girls had grown up in the first bitter-hard times, and had got
little schooling themselves. But the younger brothers and sisters, for
whom they made such sacrifices and who have had â€œadvantages,â€ never seem
to me, when I meet them now, half as interesting or as well educated. The
older girls, who helped to break up the wild sod, learned so much from
life, from poverty, from their mothers and grandmothers; they had all,
like Antonia, been early awakened and made observant by coming at a tender
age from an old country to a new. I can remember a score of these country
girls who were in service in Black Hawk during the few years I lived
there, and I can remember something unusual and engaging about each of
them. Physically they were almost a race apart, and out-of-door work had
given them a vigor which, when they got over their first shyness on coming
to town, developed into a positive carriage and freedom of movement, and
made them conspicuous among Black Hawk women.

That was before the day of High-School athletics. Girls who had to walk
more than half a mile to school were pitied. There was not a tennis court
in the town; physical exercise was thought rather inelegant for the
daughters of well-to-do families. Some of the High-School girls were jolly
and pretty, but they stayed indoors in winter because of the cold, and in
summer because of the heat. When one danced with them their bodies never
moved inside their clothes; their muscles seemed to ask but one thingâ€”not
to be disturbed. I remember those girls merely as faces in the schoolroom,
gay and rosy, or listless and dull, cut off below the shoulders, like
cherubs, by the ink-smeared tops of the high desks that were surely put
there to make us round-shouldered and hollow-chested.

The daughters of Black Hawk merchants had a confident, uninquiring belief
that they were â€œrefined,â€ and that the country girls, who â€œworked out,â€
were not. The American farmers in our county were quite as hard-pressed as
their neighbors from other countries. All alike had come to Nebraska with
little capital and no knowledge of the soil they must subdue. All had
borrowed money on their land. But no matter in what straits the
Pennsylvanian or Virginian found himself, he would not let his daughters
go out into service. Unless his girls could teach a country school, they
sat at home in poverty. The Bohemian and Scandinavian girls could not get
positions as teachers, because they had had no opportunity to learn the
language. Determined to help in the struggle to clear the homestead from
debt, they had no alternative but to go into service. Some of them, after
they came to town, remained as serious and as discreet in behavior as they
had been when they ploughed and herded on their fatherâ€™s farm. Others,
like the three Bohemian Marys, tried to make up for the years of youth
they had lost. But every one of them did what she had set out to do, and
sent home those hard-earned dollars. The girls I knew were always helping
to pay for ploughs and reapers, brood-sows, or steers to fatten.

One result of this family solidarity was that the foreign farmers in our
county were the first to become prosperous. After the fathers were out of
debt, the daughters married the sons of neighbors,â€”usually of like
nationality,â€”and the girls who once worked in Black Hawk kitchens are
to-day managing big farms and fine families of their own; their children
are better off than the children of the town women they used to serve.

I thought the attitude of the town people toward these girls very stupid.
If I told my schoolmates that Lena Lingardâ€™s grandfather was a clergyman,
and much respected in Norway, they looked at me blankly. What did it
matter ? All foreigners were ignorant people who could nâ€™t speak English.
There was not a man in Black Hawk who had the intelligence or cultivation,
much less the personal distinction, of Antoniaâ€™s father. Yet people saw no
difference between her and the three Marys; they were all Bohemians, all
â€œhired girls.â€

I always knew I should live long enough to see my country girls come into
their own, and I have. To-day the best that a harassed Black Hawk merchant
can hope for is to sell provisions and farm machinery and automobiles to
the rich farms where that first crop of stalwart Bohemian and Scandinavian
girls are now the mistresses.

The Black Hawk boys looked forward to marrying Black Hawk girls, and
living in a brand-new little house with best chairs that must not be sat
upon, and hand-painted china that must not be used. But sometimes a young
fellow would look up from his ledger, or out through the grating of his
fatherâ€™s bank, and let his eyes follow Lena Lingard, as she passed the
window with her slow, undulating walk, or Tiny Soderball, tripping by in
her short skirt and striped stockings.

The country girls were considered a menace to the social order. Their
beauty shone out too boldly against a conventional background. But anxious
mothers need have felt no alarm. They mistook the mettle of their sons.
The respect for respectability was stronger than any desire in Black Hawk
youth.

Our young man of position was like the son of a royal house; the boy who
swept out his office or drove his delivery wagon might frolic with the
jolly country girls, but he himself must sit all evening in a plush parlor
where conversation dragged so perceptibly that the father often came in
and made blundering efforts to warm up the atmosphere. On his way home
from his dull call, he would perhaps meet Tony and Lena, coming along the
sidewalk whispering to each other, or the three Bohemian Marys in their
long plush coats and caps, comporting themselves with a dignity that only
made their eventful histories the more piquant. If he went to the hotel to
see a traveling man on business, there was Tiny, arching her shoulders at
him like a kitten. If he went into the laundry to get his collars, there
were the four Danish girls, smiling up from their ironing-boards, with
their white throats and their pink cheeks.

The three Marys were the heroines of a cycle of scandalous stories, which
the old men were fond of relating as they sat about the cigar-stand in the
drug-store. Mary Dusak had been housekeeper for a bachelor rancher from
Boston, and after several years in his service she was forced to retire
from the world for a short time. Later she came back to town to take the
place of her friend, Mary Svoboda, who was similarly embarrassed. The
three Marys were considered as dangerous as high explosives to have about
the kitchen, yet they were such good cooks and such admirable housekeepers
that they never had to look for a place.

The Vannisâ€™ tent brought the town boys and the country girls together on
neutral ground. Sylvester Lovett, who was cashier in his fatherâ€™s bank,
always found his way to the tent on Saturday night. He took all the dances
Lena Lingard would give him, and even grew bold enough to walk home with
her. If his sisters or their friends happened to be among the onlookers on
â€œpopular nights,â€ Sylvester stood back in the shadow under the cottonwood
trees, smoking and watching Lena with a harassed expression. Several times
I stumbled upon him there in the dark, and I felt rather sorry for him. He
reminded me of Ole Benson, who used to sit on the draw-side and watch Lena
herd her cattle. Later in the summer, when Lena went home for a week to
visit her mother, I heard from Antonia that young Lovett drove all the way
out there to see her, and took her buggy-riding. In my ingenuousness I
hoped that Sylvester would marry Lena, and thus give all the country girls
a better position in the town.

Sylvester dallied about Lena until he began to make mistakes in his work;
had to stay at the bank until after dark to make his books balance. He was
daft about her, and every one knew it. To escape from his predicament he
ran away with a widow six years older than himself, who owned a
half-section. This remedy worked, apparently. He never looked at Lena
again, nor lifted his eyes as he ceremoniously tipped his hat when he
happened to meet her on the sidewalk.

So that was what they were like, I thought, these white-handed,
high-collared clerks and bookkeepers! I used to glare at young Lovett from
a distance and only wished I had some way of showing my contempt for him.




X


IT was at the Vannisâ€™ tent that Antonia was discovered. Hitherto she had
been looked upon more as a ward of the Harlings than as one of the â€œhired
girls.â€ She had lived in their house and yard and garden; her thoughts
never seemed to stray outside that little kingdom. But after the tent came
to town she began to go about with Tiny and Lena and their friends. The
Vannis often said that Antonia was the best dancer of them all. I
sometimes heard murmurs in the crowd outside the pavilion that Mrs.
Harling would soon have her hands full with that girl. The young men began
to joke with each other about â€œthe Harlingsâ€™ Tonyâ€ as they did about â€œthe
Marshallsâ€™ Annaâ€ or â€œthe Gardenersâ€™ Tiny.â€

Antonia talked and thought of nothing but the tent. She hummed the dance
tunes all day. When supper was late, she hurried with her dishes, dropped
and smashed them in her excitement. At the first call of the music, she
became irresponsible. If she had nâ€™t time to dress, she merely flung off
her apron and shot out of the kitchen door. Sometimes I went with her; the
moment the lighted tent came into view she would break into a run, like a
boy. There were always partners waiting for her; she began to dance before
she got her breath.

Antoniaâ€™s success at the tent had its consequences. The iceman lingered
too long now, when he came into the covered porch to fill the
refrigerator. The delivery boys hung about the kitchen when they brought
the groceries. Young farmers who were in town for Saturday came tramping
through the yard to the back door to engage dances, or to invite Tony to
parties and picnics. Lena and Norwegian Anna dropped in to help her with
her work, so that she could get away early. The boys who brought her home
after the dances sometimes laughed at the back gate and wakened Mr.
Harling from his first sleep. A crisis was inevitable.

One Saturday night Mr. Harling had gone down to the cellar for beer. As he
came up the stairs in the dark, he heard scuffling on the back porch, and
then the sound of a vigorous slap. He looked out through the side door in
time to see a pair of long legs vaulting over the picket fence. Antonia
was standing there, angry and excited. Young Harry Paine, who was to marry
his employerâ€™s daughter on Monday, had come to the tent with a crowd of
friends and danced all evening. Afterward, he begged Antonia to let him
walk home with her. She said she supposed he was a nice young man, as he
was one of Miss Francesâ€™s friends, and she did nâ€™t mind. On the back porch
he tried to kiss her, and when she protested,â€”because he was going to be
married on Monday,â€”he caught her and kissed her until she got one hand
free and slapped him.

Mr. Harling put his beer bottles down on the table. â€œThis is what Iâ€™ve
been expecting, Antonia. Youâ€™ve been going with girls who have a
reputation for being free and easy, and now youâ€™ve got the same
reputation. I wonâ€™t have this and that fellow tramping about my back yard
all the time. This is the end of it, to-night. It stops, short. You can
quit going to these dances, or you can hunt another place. Think it over.â€

The next morning when Mrs. Harling and Frances tried to reason with
Antonia, they found her agitated but determined. â€œStop going to the tent ?â€
she panted. â€œI would nâ€™t think of it for a minute! My own father could nâ€™t
make me stop! Mr. Harling ainâ€™t my boss outside my work. I wonâ€™t give up
my friends, either. The boys I go with are nice fellows. I thought Mr.
Paine was all right, too, because he used to come here. I guess I gave him
a red face for his wedding, all right!â€ she blazed out indignantly.

â€œYouâ€™ll have to do one thing or the other, Antonia,â€ Mrs. Harling told her
decidedly. â€œI canâ€™t go back on what Mr. Harling has said. This is his
house.â€

â€œThen Iâ€™ll just leave, Mrs. Harling. Lenaâ€™s been wanting me to get a place
closer to her for a long while. Mary Svobodaâ€™s going away from the
Cuttersâ€™ to work at the hotel, and I can have her place.â€

Mrs. Harling rose from her chair. â€œAntonia, if you go to the Cutters to
work, you cannot come back to this house again. You know what that man is.
It will be the ruin of you.â€

Tony snatched up the tea-kettle and began to pour boiling water over the
glasses, laughing excitedly. â€œOh, I can take care of myself! Iâ€™m a lot
stronger than Cutter is. They pay four dollars there, and thereâ€™s no
children. The workâ€™s nothing; I can have every evening, and be out a lot
in the afternoons.â€

â€œI thought you liked children. Tony, whatâ€™s come over you ?â€

â€œI donâ€™t know, something has.â€ Antonia tossed her head and set her jaw. â€œA
girl like me has got to take her good times when she can. Maybe there
wonâ€™t be any tent next year. I guess I want to have my fling, like the
other girls.â€

Mrs. Harling gave a short, harsh laugh. â€œIf you go to work for the
Cutters, youâ€™re likely to have a fling that you wonâ€™t get up from in a
hurry.â€

Frances said, when she told grandmother and me about this scene, that
every pan and plate and cup on the shelves trembled when her mother walked
out of the kitchen. Mrs. Harling declared bitterly that she wished she had
never let herself get fond of Antonia.




XI


WICK CUTTER was the money-lender who had fleeced poor Russian Peter. When
a farmer once got into the habit of going to Cutter, it was like gambling
or the lottery; in an hour of discouragement he went back.

Cutterâ€™s first name was Wycliffe, and he liked to talk about his pious
bringing-up. He contributed regularly to the Protestant churches, â€œfor
sentimentâ€™s sake,â€ as he said with a flourish of the hand. He came from a
town in Iowa where there were a great many Swedes, and could speak a
little Swedish, which gave him a great advantage with the early
Scandinavian settlers.

In every frontier settlement there are men who have come there to escape
restraint. Cutter was one of the â€œfast setâ€ of Black Hawk business men. He
was an inveterate gambler, though a poor loser. When we saw a light
burning in his office late at night, we knew that a game of poker was
going on. Cutter boasted that he never drank anything stronger than
sherry, and he said he got his start in life by saving the money that
other young men spent for cigars. He was full of moral maxims for boys.
When he came to our house on business, he quoted â€œPoor Richardâ€™s Almanackâ€
to me, and told me he was delighted to find a town boy who could milk a
cow. He was particularly affable to grandmother, and whenever they met he
would begin at once to talk about â€œthe good old timesâ€ and simple living.
I detested his pink, bald head, and his yellow whiskers, always soft and
glistening. It was said he brushed them every night, as a woman does her
hair. His white teeth looked factory-made. His skin was red and rough, as
if from perpetual sunburn; he often went away to hot springs to take mud
baths. He was notoriously dissolute with women. Two Swedish girls who had
lived in his house were the worse for the experience. One of them he had
taken to Omaha and established in the business for which he had fitted
her. He still visited her.

Cutter lived in a state of perpetual warfare with his wife, and yet,
apparently, they never thought of separating. They dwelt in a fussy,
scroll-work house, painted white and buried in thick evergreens, with a
fussy white fence and barn. Cutter thought he knew a great deal about
horses, and usually had a colt which he was training for the track. On
Sunday mornings one could see him out at the fair grounds, speeding around
the race-course in his trotting-buggy, wearing yellow gloves and a
black-and-white-check traveling cap, his whiskers blowing back in the
breeze. If there were any boys about, Cutter would offer one of them a
quarter to hold the stop-watch, and then drive off, saying he had no
change and would â€œfix it up next time.â€ No one could cut his lawn or wash
his buggy to suit him. He was so fastidious and prim about his place that
a boy would go to a good deal of trouble to throw a dead cat into his back
yard, or to dump a sackful of tin cans in his alley. It was a peculiar
combination of old-maidishness and licentiousness that made Cutter seem so
despicable.

He had certainly met his match when he married Mrs. Cutter. She was a
terrifying-looking person; almost a giantess in height, raw-boned, with
iron-gray hair, a face always flushed, and prominent, hysterical eyes.
When she meant to be entertaining and agreeable, she nodded her head
incessantly and snapped her eyes at one. Her teeth were long and curved,
like a horseâ€™s; people said babies always cried if she smiled at them. Her
face had a kind of fascination for me; it was the very color and shape of
anger. There was a gleam of something akin to insanity in her full,
intense eyes. She was formal in manner, and made calls in rustling,
steel-gray brocades and a tall bonnet with bristling aigrettes.

Mrs. Cutter painted china so assiduously that even her washbowls and
pitchers, and her husbandâ€™s shaving-mug, were covered with violets and
lilies. Once when Cutter was exhibiting some of his wifeâ€™s china to a
caller, he dropped a piece. Mrs. Cutter put her handkerchief to her lips
as if she were going to faint and said grandly: â€œMr. Cutter, you have
broken all the Commandmentsâ€”spare the finger-bowls!â€

They quarreled from the moment Cutter came into the house until they went
to bed at night, and their hired girls reported these scenes to the town
at large. Mrs. Cutter had several times cut paragraphs about unfaithful
husbands out of the newspapers and mailed them to Cutter in a disguised
handwriting. Cutter would come home at noon, find the mutilated journal in
the paper-rack, and triumphantly fit the clipping into the space from
which it had been cut. Those two could quarrel all morning about whether
he ought to put on his heavy or his light underwear, and all evening about
whether he had taken cold or not.

The Cutters had major as well as minor subjects for dispute. The chief of
these was the question of inheritance: Mrs. Cutter told her husband it was
plainly his fault they had no children. He insisted that Mrs. Cutter had
purposely remained childless, with the determination to outlive him and to
share his property with her â€œpeople,â€ whom he detested. To this she would
reply that unless he changed his mode of life, she would certainly outlive
him. After listening to her insinuations about his physical soundness,
Cutter would resume his dumb-bell practice for a month, or rise daily at
the hour when his wife most liked to sleep, dress noisily, and drive out
to the track with his trotting-horse.

Once when they had quarreled about household expenses, Mrs. Cutter put on
her brocade and went among their friends soliciting orders for painted
china, saying that Mr. Cutter had compelled her â€œto live by her brush.â€
Cutter was nâ€™t shamed as she had expected; he was delighted!

Cutter often threatened to chop down the cedar trees which half-buried the
house. His wife declared she would leave him if she were stripped of the
â€œprivacyâ€ which she felt these trees afforded her. That was his
opportunity, surely; but he never cut down the trees. The Cutters seemed
to find their relations to each other interesting and stimulating, and
certainly the rest of us found them so. Wick Cutter was different from any
other rascal I have ever known, but I have found Mrs. Cutters all over the
world; sometimes founding new religions, sometimes being forcibly
fedâ€”easily recognizable, even when superficially tamed.




XII


AFTER Antonia went to live with the Cutters, she seemed to care about
nothing but picnics and parties and having a good time. When she was not
going to a dance, she sewed until midnight. Her new clothes were the
subject of caustic comment. Under Lenaâ€™s direction she copied Mrs.
Gardenerâ€™s new party dress and Mrs. Smithâ€™s street costume so ingeniously
in cheap materials that those ladies were greatly annoyed, and Mrs.
Cutter, who was jealous of them, was secretly pleased.

Tony wore gloves now, and high-heeled shoes and feathered bonnets, and she
went downtown nearly every afternoon with Tiny and Lena and the Marshallsâ€™
Norwegian Anna. We High-School boys used to linger on the playground at
the afternoon recess to watch them as they came tripping down the hill
along the board sidewalk, two and two. They were growing prettier every
day, but as they passed us, I used to think with pride that Antonia, like
Snow-White in the fairy tale, was still â€œfairest of them all.â€

Being a Senior now, I got away from school early. Sometimes I overtook the
girls downtown and coaxed them into the ice-cream parlor, where they would
sit chattering and laughing, telling me all the news from the country. I
remember how angry Tiny Soderball made me one afternoon. She declared she
had heard grandmother was going to make a Baptist preacher of me. â€œI guess
youâ€™ll have to stop dancing and wear a white necktie then. Wonâ€™t he look
funny, girls ?â€

Lena laughed. â€œYouâ€™ll have to hurry up, Jim. If youâ€™re going to be a
preacher, I want you to marry me. You must promise to marry us all, and
then baptize the babies.â€

Norwegian Anna, always dignified, looked at her reprovingly.

â€œBaptists donâ€™t believe in christening babies, do they, Jim ?â€

I told her I did nâ€™t know what they believed, and did nâ€™t care, and that I
certainly was nâ€™t going to be a preacher.

â€œThatâ€™s too bad,â€ Tiny simpered. She was in a teasing mood. â€œYouâ€™d make
such a good one. Youâ€™re so studious. Maybe youâ€™d like to be a professor.
You used to teach Tony, did nâ€™t you ?â€

Antonia broke in. â€œIâ€™ve set my heart on Jim being a doctor. Youâ€™d be good
with sick people, Jim. Your grandmotherâ€™s trained you up so nice. My papa
always said you were an awful smart boy.â€

I said I was going to be whatever I pleased. â€œWonâ€™t you be surprised, Miss
Tiny, if I turn out to be a regular devil of a fellow ?â€

They laughed until a glance from Norwegian Anna checked them; the
High-School Principal had just come into the front part of the shop to buy
bread for supper. Anna knew the whisper was going about that I was a sly
one. People said there must be something queer about a boy who showed no
interest in girls of his own age, but who could be lively enough when he
was with Tony and Lena or the three Marys.



The enthusiasm for the dance, which the Vannis had kindled, did not at
once die out. After the tent left town, the Euchre Club became the Owl
Club, and gave dances in the Masonic Hall once a week. I was invited to
join, but declined. I was moody and restless that winter, and tired of the
people I saw every day. Charley Harling was already at Annapolis, while I
was still sitting in Black Hawk, answering to my name at roll-call every
morning, rising from my desk at the sound of a bell and marching out like
the grammar-school children. Mrs. Harling was a little cool toward me,
because I continued to champion Antonia. What was there for me to do after
supper ? Usually I had learned next dayâ€™s lessons by the time I left the
school building, and I could nâ€™t sit still and read forever.

In the evening I used to prowl about, hunting for diversion. There lay the
familiar streets, frozen with snow or liquid with mud. They led to the
houses of good people who were putting the babies to bed, or simply
sitting still before the parlor stove, digesting their supper. Black Hawk
had two saloons. One of them was admitted, even by the church people, to
be as respectable as a saloon could be. Handsome Anton Jelinek, who had
rented his homestead and come to town, was the proprietor. In his saloon
there were long tables where the Bohemian and German farmers could eat the
lunches they brought from home while they drank their beer. Jelinek kept
rye bread on hand, and smoked fish and strong imported cheeses to please
the foreign palate. I liked to drop into his bar-room and listen to the
talk. But one day he overtook me on the street and clapped me on the
shoulder.

â€œJim,â€ he said, â€œI am good friends with you and I always like to see you.
But you know how the church people think about saloons. Your grandpa has
always treated me fine, and I donâ€™t like to have you come into my place,
because I know he donâ€™t like it, and it puts me in bad with him.â€

So I was shut out of that.

One could hang about the drug-store, and listen to the old men who sat
there every evening, talking politics and telling raw stories. One could
go to the cigar factory and chat with the old German who raised canaries
for sale, and look at his stuffed birds. But whatever you began with him,
the talk went back to taxidermy. There was the depot, of course; I often
went down to see the night train come in, and afterward sat awhile with
the disconsolate telegrapher who was always hoping to be transferred to
Omaha or Denver, â€œwhere there was some life.â€ He was sure to bring out his
pictures of actresses and dancers. He got them with cigarette coupons, and
nearly smoked himself to death to possess these desired forms and faces.
For a change, one could talk to the station agent; but he was another
malcontent; spent all his spare time writing letters to officials
requesting a transfer. He wanted to get back to Wyoming where he could go
trout-fishing on Sundays. He used to say â€œthere was nothing in life for
him but trout streams, ever since heâ€™d lost his twins.â€

These were the distractions I had to choose from. There were no other
lights burning downtown after nine oâ€™clock. On starlight nights I used to
pace up and down those long, cold streets, scowling at the little,
sleeping houses on either side, with their storm-windows and covered back
porches. They were flimsy shelters, most of them poorly built of light
wood, with spindle porch-posts horribly mutilated by the turning-lathe.
Yet for all their frailness, how much jealousy and envy and unhappiness
some of them managed to contain! The life that went on in them seemed to
me made up of evasions and negations; shifts to save cooking, to save
washing and cleaning, devices to propitiate the tongue of gossip. This
guarded mode of existence was like living under a tyranny. Peopleâ€™s
speech, their voices, their very glances, became furtive and repressed.
Every individual taste, every natural appetite, was bridled by caution.
The people asleep in those houses, I thought, tried to live like the mice
in their own kitchens; to make no noise, to leave no trace, to slip over
the surface of things in the dark. The growing piles of ashes and cinders
in the back yards were the only evidence that the wasteful, consuming
process of life went on at all. On Tuesday nights the Owl Club danced;
then there was a little stir in the streets, and here and there one could
see a lighted window until midnight. But the next night all was dark
again.

After I refused to join â€œthe Owls,â€ as they were called, I made a bold
resolve to go to the Saturday night dances at Firemenâ€™s Hall. I knew it
would be useless to acquaint my elders with any such plan. Grandfather did
nâ€™t approve of dancing anyway; he would only say that if I wanted to dance
I could go to the Masonic Hall, among â€œthe people we knew.â€ It was just my
point that I saw altogether too much of the people we knew.

My bedroom was on the ground floor, and as I studied there, I had a stove
in it. I used to retire to my room early on Saturday night, change my
shirt and collar and put on my Sunday coat. I waited until all was quiet
and the old people were asleep, then raised my window, climbed out, and
went softly through the yard. The first time I deceived my grandparents I
felt rather shabby, perhaps even the second time, but I soon ceased to
think about it.

The dance at the Firemenâ€™s Hall was the one thing I looked forward to all
the week. There I met the same people I used to see at the Vannisâ€™ tent.
Sometimes there were Bohemians from Wilber, or German boys who came down
on the afternoon freight from Bismarck. Tony and Lena and Tiny were always
there, and the three Bohemian Marys, and the Danish laundry girls.

The four Danish girls lived with the laundryman and his wife in their
house behind the laundry, with a big garden where the clothes were hung
out to dry. The laundryman was a kind, wise old fellow, who paid his girls
well, looked out for them, and gave them a good home. He told me once that
his own daughter died just as she was getting old enough to help her
mother, and that he had been â€œtrying to make up for it ever since.â€ On
summer afternoons he used to sit for hours on the sidewalk in front of his
laundry, his newspaper lying on his knee, watching his girls through the
big open window while they ironed and talked in Danish. The clouds of
white dust that blew up the street, the gusts of hot wind that withered
his vegetable garden, never disturbed his calm. His droll expression
seemed to say that he had found the secret of contentment. Morning and
evening he drove about in his spring wagon, distributing freshly ironed
clothes, and collecting bags of linen that cried out for his suds and
sunny drying-lines. His girls never looked so pretty at the dances as they
did standing by the ironing-board, or over the tubs, washing the fine
pieces, their white arms and throats bare, their cheeks bright as the
brightest wild roses, their gold hair moist with the steam or the heat and
curling in little damp spirals about their ears. They had not learned much
English, and were not so ambitious as Tony or Lena; but they were kind,
simple girls and they were always happy. When one danced with them, one
smelled their clean, freshly ironed clothes that had been put away with
rosemary leaves from Mr. Jensenâ€™s garden.

There were never girls enough to go round at those dances, but every one
wanted a turn with Tony and Lena. Lena moved without exertion, rather
indolently, and her hand often accented the rhythm softly on her partnerâ€™s
shoulder. She smiled if one spoke to her, but seldom answered. The music
seemed to put her into a soft, waking dream, and her violet-colored eyes
looked sleepily and confidingly at one from under her long lashes. When
she sighed she exhaled a heavy perfume of sachet powder. To dance â€œHome,
Sweet Home,â€ with Lena was like coming in with the tide. She danced every
dance like a waltz, and it was always the same waltzâ€”the waltz of coming
home to something, of inevitable, fated return. After a while one got
restless under it, as one does under the heat of a soft, sultry summer
day.

When you spun out into the floor with Tony, you did nâ€™t return to
anything. You set out every time upon a new adventure. I liked to
schottische with her; she had so much spring and variety, and was always
putting in new steps and slides. She taught me to dance against and around
the hard-and-fast beat of the music. If, instead of going to the end of
the railroad, old Mr. Shimerda had stayed in New York and picked up a
living with his fiddle, how different Antoniaâ€™s life might have been!

Antonia often went to the dances with Larry Donovan, a passenger conductor
who was a kind of professional ladiesâ€™ man, as we said. I remember how
admiringly all the boys looked at her the night she first wore her
velveteen dress, made like Mrs. Gardenerâ€™s black velvet. She was lovely to
see, with her eyes shining, and her lips always a little parted when she
danced. That constant, dark color in her cheeks never changed.

One evening when Donovan was out on his run, Antonia came to the hall with
Norwegian Anna and her young man, and that night I took her home. When we
were in the Cutterâ€™s yard, sheltered by the evergreens, I told her she
must kiss me good-night.

â€œWhy, sure, Jim.â€ A moment later she drew her face away and whispered
indignantly, â€œWhy, Jim! You know you ainâ€™t right to kiss me like that.
Iâ€™ll tell your grandmother on you!â€

â€œLena Lingard lets me kiss her,â€ I retorted, â€œand Iâ€™m not half as fond of
her as I am of you.â€

â€œLena does ?â€ Tony gasped. â€œIf sheâ€™s up to any of her nonsense with you,
Iâ€™ll scratch her eyes out!â€ She took my arm again and we walked out of the
gate and up and down the sidewalk. â€œNow, donâ€™t you go and be a fool like
some of these town boys. Youâ€™re not going to sit around here and whittle
store-boxes and tell stories all your life. You are going away to school
and make something of yourself. Iâ€™m just awful proud of you. You wonâ€™t go
and get mixed up with the Swedes, will you ?â€

â€œI donâ€™t care anything about any of them but you,â€ I said. â€œAnd youâ€™ll
always treat me like a kid, I suppose.â€

She laughed and threw her arms around me. â€œI expect I will, but youâ€™re a
kid Iâ€™m awful fond of, anyhow! You can like me all you want to, but if I
see you hanging round with Lena much, Iâ€™ll go to your grandmother, as sure
as your nameâ€™s Jim Burden! Lenaâ€™s all right, onlyâ€”well, you know yourself
sheâ€™s soft that way. She canâ€™t help it. Itâ€™s natural to her.â€

If she was proud of me, I was so proud of her that I carried my head high
as I emerged from the dark cedars and shut the Cuttersâ€™ gate softly behind
me. Her warm, sweet face, her kind arms, and the true heart in her; she
was, oh, she was still my Antonia! I looked with contempt at the dark,
silent little houses about me as I walked home, and thought of the stupid
young men who were asleep in some of them. I knew where the real women
were, though I was only a boy; and I would not be afraid of them, either!

I hated to enter the still house when I went home from the dances, and it
was long before I could get to sleep. Toward morning I used to have
pleasant dreams: sometimes Tony and I were out in the country, sliding
down straw-stacks as we used to do; climbing up the yellow mountains over
and over, and slipping down the smooth sides into soft piles of chaff.

One dream I dreamed a great many times, and it was always the same. I was
in a harvest-field full of shocks, and I was lying against one of them.
Lena Lingard came across the stubble barefoot, in a short skirt, with a
curved reaping-hook in her hand, and she was flushed like the dawn, with a
kind of luminous rosiness all about her. She sat down beside me, turned to
me with a soft sigh and said, â€œNow they are all gone, and I can kiss you
as much as I like.â€

I used to wish I could have this flattering dream about Antonia, but I
never did.




XIII


I NOTICED one afternoon that grandmother had been crying. Her feet seemed
to drag as she moved about the house, and I got up from the table where I
was studying and went to her, asking if she did nâ€™t feel well, and if I
could nâ€™t help her with her work.

â€œNo, thank you, Jim. Iâ€™m troubled, but I guess Iâ€™m well enough. Getting a
little rusty in the bones, maybe,â€ she added bitterly.

I stood hesitating. â€œWhat are you fretting about, grandmother ? Has
grandfather lost any money ?â€

â€œNo, it ainâ€™t money. I wish it was. But Iâ€™ve heard things. You must â€™aâ€™
known it would come back to me sometime.â€ She dropped into a chair, and
covering her face with her apron, began to cry. â€œJim,â€ she said, â€œI was
never one that claimed old folks could bring up their grandchildren. But
it came about so; there was nâ€™t any other way for you, it seemed like.â€

I put my arms around her. I could nâ€™t bear to see her cry.

â€œWhat is it, grandmother ? Is it the Firemenâ€™s dances ?â€

She nodded.

â€œIâ€™m sorry I sneaked off like that. But thereâ€™s nothing wrong about the
dances, and I have nâ€™t done anything wrong. I like all those country
girls, and I like to dance with them. Thatâ€™s all there is to it.â€

â€œBut it ainâ€™t right to deceive us, son, and it brings blame on us. People
say you are growing up to be a bad boy, and that ainâ€™t just to us.â€

â€œI donâ€™t care what they say about me, but if it hurts you, that settles
it. I wonâ€™t go to the Firemenâ€™s Hall again.â€

I kept my promise, of course, but I found the spring months dull enough. I
sat at home with the old people in the evenings now, reading Latin that
was not in our High-School course. I had made up my mind to do a lot of
college requirement work in the summer, and to enter the freshman class at
the University without conditions in the fall. I wanted to get away as
soon as possible.

Disapprobation hurt me, I found,â€”even that of people whom I did not
admire. As the spring came on, I grew more and more lonely, and fell back
on the telegrapher and the cigar-maker and his canaries for companionship.
I remember I took a melancholy pleasure in hanging a May-basket for Nina
Harling that spring. I bought the flowers from an old German woman who
always had more window plants than any one else, and spent an afternoon
trimming a little work-basket. When dusk came on, and the new moon hung in
the sky, I went quietly to the Harlingsâ€™ front door with my offering, rang
the bell, and then ran away as was the custom. Through the willow hedge I
could hear Ninaâ€™s cries of delight, and I felt comforted.

On those warm, soft spring evenings I often lingered downtown to walk home
with Frances, and talked to her about my plans and about the reading I was
doing. One evening she said she thought Mrs. Harling was not seriously
offended with me.

â€œMama is as broad-minded as mothers ever are, I guess. But you know she
was hurt about Antonia, and she canâ€™t understand why you like to be with
Tiny and Lena better than with the girls of your own set.â€

â€œCan you ?â€ I asked bluntly.

Frances laughed. â€œYes, I think I can. You knew them in the country, and
you like to take sides. In some ways youâ€™re older than boys of your age.
It will be all right with mama after you pass your college examinations
and she sees youâ€™re in earnest.â€

â€œIf you were a boy,â€ I persisted, â€œyou would nâ€™t belong to the Owl Club,
either. Youâ€™d be just like me.â€

She shook her head. â€œI would and I would nâ€™t. I expect I know the country
girls better than you do. You always put a kind of glamour over them. The
trouble with you, Jim, is that youâ€™re romantic. Mamaâ€™s going to your
Commencement. She asked me the other day if I knew what your oration is to
be about. She wants you to do well.â€

I thought my oration very good. It stated with fervor a great many things
I had lately discovered. Mrs. Harling came to the Opera House to hear the
Commencement exercises, and I looked at her most of the time while I made
my speech. Her keen, intelligent eyes never left my face. Afterward she
came back to the dressing-room where we stood, with our diplomas in our
hands, walked up to me, and said heartily: â€œYou surprised me, Jim. I did
nâ€™t believe you could do as well as that. You did nâ€™t get that speech out
of books.â€ Among my graduation presents there was a silk umbrella from
Mrs. Harling, with my name on the handle.

I walked home from the Opera House alone. As I passed the Methodist
Church, I saw three white figures ahead of me, pacing up and down under
the arching maple trees, where the moonlight filtered through the lush
June foliage. They hurried toward me; they were waiting for meâ€”Lena and
Tony and Anna Hansen.

â€œOh, Jim, it was splendid!â€ Tony was breathing hard, as she always did
when her feelings outran her language. â€œThere ainâ€™t a lawyer in Black Hawk
could make a speech like that. I just stopped your grandpa and said so to
him. He wonâ€™t tell you, but he told us he was awful surprised himself, did
nâ€™t he, girls ?â€

Lena sidled up to me and said teasingly: â€œWhat made you so solemn ? I
thought you were scared. I was sure youâ€™d forget.â€

Anna spoke wistfully. â€œIt must make you happy, Jim, to have fine thoughts
like that in your mind all the time, and to have words to put them in. I
always wanted to go to school, you know.â€

â€œOh, I just sat there and wished my papa could hear you! Jim,â€â€”Antonia
took hold of my coat lapels,â€”â€œthere was something in your speech that made
me think so about my papa!â€

â€œI thought about your papa when I wrote my speech, Tony,â€ I said. â€œI
dedicated it to him.â€

She threw her arms around me, and her dear face was all wet with tears.

I stood watching their white dresses glimmer smaller and smaller down the
sidewalk as they went away. I have had no other success that pulled at my
heartstrings like that one.




XIV


THE day after Commencement I moved my books and desk upstairs, to an empty
room where I should be undisturbed, and I fell to studying in earnest. I
worked off a yearâ€™s trigonometry that summer, and began Virgil alone.
Morning after morning I used to pace up and down my sunny little room,
looking off at the distant river bluffs and the roll of the blond pastures
between, scanning the Ã†neid aloud and committing long passages to memory.
Sometimes in the evening Mrs. Harling called to me as I passed her gate,
and asked me to come in and let her play for me. She was lonely for
Charley, she said, and liked to have a boy about. Whenever my grandparents
had misgivings, and began to wonder whether I was not too young to go off
to college alone, Mrs. Harling took up my cause vigorously. Grandfather
had such respect for her judgment that I knew he would not go against her.

I had only one holiday that summer. It was in July. I met Antonia downtown
on Saturday afternoon, and learned that she and Tiny and Lena were going
to the river next day with Anna Hansenâ€”the elder was all in bloom now, and
Anna wanted to make elder-blow wine.

â€œAnnaâ€™s to drive us down in the Marshallsâ€™ delivery wagon, and weâ€™ll take
a nice lunch and have a picnic. Just us; nobody else. Could nâ€™t you happen
along, Jim ? It would be like old times.â€

I considered a moment. â€œMaybe I can, if I wonâ€™t be in the way.â€

On Sunday morning I rose early and got out of Black Hawk while the dew was
still heavy on the long meadow grasses. It was the high season for summer
flowers. The pink bee-bush stood tall along the sandy roadsides, and the
cone-flowers and rose mallow grew everywhere. Across the wire fence, in
the long grass, I saw a clump of flaming orange-colored milkweed, rare in
that part of the State. I left the road and went around through a stretch
of pasture that was always cropped short in summer, where the gaillardia
came up year after year and matted over the ground with the deep, velvety
red that is in Bokhara carpets. The country was empty and solitary except
for the larks that Sunday morning, and it seemed to lift itself up to me
and to come very close.

The river was running strong for midsummer; heavy rains to the west of us
had kept it full. I crossed the bridge and went upstream along the wooded
shore to a pleasant dressing-room I knew among the dogwood bushes, all
overgrown with wild grapevines. I began to undress for a swim. The girls
would not be along yet. For the first time it occurred to me that I would
be homesick for that river after I left it. The sandbars, with their clean
white beaches and their little groves of willows and cottonwood seedlings,
were a sort of No Manâ€™s Land, little newly-created worlds that belonged to
the Black Hawk boys. Charley Harling and I had hunted through these woods,
fished from the fallen logs, until I knew every inch of the river shores
and had a friendly feeling for every bar and shallow.

After my swim, while I was playing about indolently in the water, I heard
the sound of hoofs and wheels on the bridge. I struck downstream and
shouted, as the open spring wagon came into view on the middle span. They
stopped the horse, and the two girls in the bottom of the cart stood up,
steadying themselves by the shoulders of the two in front, so that they
could see me better. They were charming up there, huddled together in the
cart and peering down at me like curious deer when they come out of the
thicket to drink. I found bottom near the bridge and stood up, waving to
them.

â€œHow pretty you look!â€ I called.

â€œSo do you!â€ they shouted altogether, and broke into peals of laughter.
Anna Hansen shook the reins and they drove on, while I zigzagged back to
my inlet and clambered up behind an overhanging elm. I dried myself in the
sun, and dressed slowly, reluctant to leave that green enclosure where the
sunlight flickered so bright through the grapevine leaves and the
woodpecker hammered away in the crooked elm that trailed out over the
water. As I went along the road back to the bridge I kept picking off
little pieces of scaly chalk from the dried water gullies, and breaking
them up in my hands.

When I came upon the Marshallsâ€™ delivery horse, tied in the shade, the
girls had already taken their baskets and gone down the east road which
wound through the sand and scrub. I could hear them calling to each other.
The elder bushes did not grow back in the shady ravines between the
bluffs, but in the hot, sandy bottoms along the stream, where their roots
were always in moisture and their tops in the sun. The blossoms were
unusually luxuriant and beautiful that summer.

I followed a cattle path through the thick underbrush until I came to a
slope that fell away abruptly to the waterâ€™s edge. A great chunk of the
shore had been bitten out by some spring freshet, and the scar was masked
by elder bushes, growing down to the water in flowery terraces. I did not
touch them. I was overcome by content and drowsiness and by the warm
silence about me. There was no sound but the high, sing-song buzz of wild
bees and the sunny gurgle of the water underneath. I peeped over the edge
of the bank to see the little stream that made the noise; it flowed along
perfectly clear over the sand and gravel, cut off from the muddy main
current by a long sandbar. Down there, on the lower shelf of the bank, I
saw Antonia, seated alone under the pagoda-like elders. She looked up when
she heard me, and smiled, but I saw that she had been crying. I slid down
into the soft sand beside her and asked her what was the matter.

â€œIt makes me homesick, Jimmy, this flower, this smell,â€ she said softly.
â€œWe have this flower very much at home, in the old country. It always grew
in our yard and my papa had a green bench and a table under the bushes. In
summer, when they were in bloom, he used to sit there with his friend that
played the trombone. When I was little I used to go down there to hear
them talkâ€”beautiful talk, like what I never hear in this country.â€

â€œWhat did they talk about ?â€ I asked her.

She sighed and shook her head. â€œOh, I donâ€™t know! About music, and the
woods, and about God, and when they were young.â€ She turned to me suddenly
and looked into my eyes. â€œYou think, Jimmy, that maybe my fatherâ€™s spirit
can go back to those old places ?â€

I told her about the feeling of her fatherâ€™s presence I had on that winter
day when my grandparents had gone over to see his dead body and I was left
alone in the house. I said I felt sure then that he was on his way back to
his own country, and that even now, when I passed his grave, I always
thought of him as being among the woods and fields that were so dear to
him.

Antonia had the most trusting, responsive eyes in the world; love and
credulousness seemed to look out of them with open faces. â€œWhy did nâ€™t you
ever tell me that before ? It makes me feel more sure for him.â€ After a
while she said: â€œYou know, Jim, my father was different from my mother. He
did not have to marry my mother, and all his brothers quarreled with him
because he did. I used to hear the old people at home whisper about it.
They said he could have paid my mother money, and not married her. But he
was older than she was, and he was too kind to treat her like that. He
lived in his motherâ€™s house, and she was a poor girl come in to do the
work. After my father married her, my grandmother never let my mother come
into her house again. When I went to my grandmotherâ€™s funeral was the only
time I was ever in my grandmotherâ€™s house. Donâ€™t that seem strange ?â€

While she talked, I lay back in the hot sand and looked up at the blue sky
between the flat bouquets of elder. I could hear the bees humming and
singing, but they stayed up in the sun above the flowers and did not come
down into the shadow of the leaves. Antonia seemed to me that day exactly
like the little girl who used to come to our house with Mr. Shimerda.

â€œSome day, Tony, I am going over to your country, and I am going to the
little town where you lived. Do you remember all about it ?â€

â€œJim,â€ she said earnestly, â€œif I was put down there in the middle of the
night, I could find my way all over that little town; and along the river
to the next town, where my grandmother lived. My feet remember all the
little paths through the woods, and where the big roots stick out to trip
you. I ainâ€™t never forgot my own country.â€

There was a crackling in the branches above us, and Lena Lingard peered
down over the edge of the bank.

â€œYou lazy things!â€ she cried. â€œAll this elder, and you two lying there!
Did nâ€™t you hear us calling you ?â€ Almost as flushed as she had been in my
dream, she leaned over the edge of the bank and began to demolish our
flowery pagoda. I had never seen her so energetic; she was panting with
zeal, and the perspiration stood in drops on her short, yielding upper
lip. I sprang to my feet and ran up the bank.

It was noon now, and so hot that the dogwoods and scrub-oaks began to turn
up the silvery under-side of their leaves, and all the foliage looked soft
and wilted. I carried the lunch-basket to the top of one of the chalk
bluffs, where even on the calmest days there was always a breeze. The
flat-topped, twisted little oaks threw light shadows on the grass. Below
us we could see the windings of the river, and Black Hawk, grouped among
its trees, and, beyond, the rolling country, swelling gently until it met
the sky. We could recognize familiar farmhouses and windmills. Each of the
girls pointed out to me the direction in which her fatherâ€™s farm lay, and
told me how many acres were in wheat that year and how many in corn.

â€œMy old folks,â€ said Tiny Soderball, â€œhave put in twenty acres of rye.
They get it ground at the mill, and it makes nice bread. It seems like my
mother ainâ€™t been so homesick, ever since fatherâ€™s raised rye flour for
her.â€

â€œIt must have been a trial for our mothers,â€ said Lena, â€œcoming out here
and having to do everything different. My mother had always lived in town.
She says she started behind in farm-work, and never has caught up.â€

â€œYes, a new countryâ€™s hard on the old ones, sometimes,â€ said Anna
thoughtfully. â€œMy grandmotherâ€™s getting feeble now, and her mind wanders.
Sheâ€™s forgot about this country, and thinks sheâ€™s at home in Norway. She
keeps asking mother to take her down to the waterside and the fish market.
She craves fish all the time. Whenever I go home I take her canned salmon
and mackerel.â€

â€œMercy, itâ€™s hot!â€ Lena yawned. She was supine under a little oak, resting
after the fury of her elder-hunting, and had taken off the high-heeled
slippers she had been silly enough to wear. â€œCome here, Jim. You never got
the sand out of your hair.â€ She began to draw her fingers slowly through
my hair.

Antonia pushed her away. â€œYouâ€™ll never get it out like that,â€ she said
sharply. She gave my head a rough touzling and finished me off with
something like a box on the ear. â€œLena, you ought nâ€™t to try to wear those
slippers any more. Theyâ€™re too small for your feet. Youâ€™d better give them
to me for Yulka.â€

â€œAll right,â€ said Lena good-naturedly, tucking her white stockings under
her skirt. â€œYou get all Yulkaâ€™s things, donâ€™t you ? I wish father did nâ€™t
have such bad luck with his farm machinery; then I could buy more things
for my sisters. Iâ€™m going to get Mary a new coat this fall, if the sulky
ploughâ€™s never paid for!â€

Tiny asked her why she did nâ€™t wait until after Christmas, when coats
would be cheaper. â€œWhat do you think of poor me ?â€ she added; â€œwith six at
home, younger than I am ? And they all think Iâ€™m rich, because when I go
back to the country Iâ€™m dressed so fine!â€ She shrugged her shoulders.
â€œBut, you know, my weakness is playthings. I like to buy them playthings
better than what they need.â€

â€œI know how that is,â€ said Anna. â€œWhen we first came here, and I was
little, we were too poor to buy toys. I never got over the loss of a doll
somebody gave me before we left Norway. A boy on the boat broke her, and I
still hate him for it.â€

â€œI guess after you got here you had plenty of live dolls to nurse, like
me!â€ Lena remarked cynically.

â€œYes, the babies came along pretty fast, to be sure. But I never minded. I
was fond of them all. The youngest one, that we did nâ€™t any of us want, is
the one we love best now.â€

Lena sighed. â€œOh, the babies are all right; if only they donâ€™t come in
winter. Ours nearly always did. I donâ€™t see how mother stood it. I tell
you what girls,â€ she sat up with sudden energy; â€œIâ€™m going to get my
mother out of that old sod house where sheâ€™s lived so many years. The men
will never do it. Johnnie, thatâ€™s my oldest brother, heâ€™s wanting to get
married now, and build a house for his girl instead of his mother. Mrs.
Thomas says she thinks I can move to some other town pretty soon, and go
into business for myself. If I donâ€™t get into business, Iâ€™ll maybe marry a
rich gambler.â€

â€œThat would be a poor way to get on,â€ said Anna sarcastically. â€œI wish I
could teach school, like Selma Kronn. Just think! Sheâ€™ll be the first
Scandinavian girl to get a position in the High School. We ought to be
proud of her.â€

Selma was a studious girl, who had not much tolerance for giddy things
like Tiny and Lena; but they always spoke of her with admiration.

Tiny moved about restlessly, fanning herself with her straw hat. â€œIf I was
smart like her, Iâ€™d be at my books day and night. But she was born
smartâ€”and look how her fatherâ€™s trained her! He was something high up in
the old country.â€

â€œSo was my motherâ€™s father,â€ murmured Lena, â€œbut thatâ€™s all the good it
does us! My fatherâ€™s father was smart, too, but he was wild. He married a
Lapp. I guess thatâ€™s whatâ€™s the matter with me; they say Lapp blood will
out.â€

â€œA real Lapp, Lena ?â€ I exclaimed. â€œThe kind that wear skins ?â€

â€œI donâ€™t know if she wore skins, but she was a Lapp all right, and his
folks felt dreadful about it. He was sent up north on some Government job
he had, and fell in with her. He would marry her.â€

â€œBut I thought Lapland women were fat and ugly, and had squint eyes, like
Chinese ?â€ I objected.

â€œI donâ€™t know, maybe. There must be something mighty taking about the Lapp
girls, though; mother says the Norwegians up north are always afraid their
boys will run after them.â€

In the afternoon, when the heat was less oppressive, we had a lively game
of â€œPussy Wants a Corner,â€ on the flat bluff-top, with the little trees
for bases. Lena was Pussy so often that she finally said she would nâ€™t
play any more. We threw ourselves down on the grass, out of breath.

â€œJim,â€ Antonia said dreamily, â€œI want you to tell the girls about how the
Spanish first came here, like you and Charley Harling used to talk about.
Iâ€™ve tried to tell them, but I leave out so much.â€

They sat under a little oak, Tony resting against the trunk and the other
girls leaning against her and each other, and listened to the little I was
able to tell them about Coronado and his search for the Seven Golden
Cities. At school we were taught that he had not got so far north as
Nebraska, but had given up his quest and turned back somewhere in Kansas.
But Charley Harling and I had a strong belief that he had been along this
very river. A farmer in the county north of ours, when he was breaking
sod, had turned up a metal stirrup of fine workmanship, and a sword with a
Spanish inscription on the blade. He lent these relics to Mr. Harling, who
brought them home with him. Charley and I scoured them, and they were on
exhibition in the Harling office all summer. Father Kelly, the priest, had
found the name of the Spanish maker on the sword, and an abbreviation that
stood for the city of Cordova.

â€œAnd that I saw with my own eyes,â€ Antonia put in triumphantly. â€œSo Jim
and Charley were right, and the teachers were wrong!â€

The girls began to wonder among themselves. Why had the Spaniards come so
far ? What must this country have been like, then ? Why had Coronado never
gone back to Spain, to his riches and his castles and his king ? I could
nâ€™t tell them. I only knew the school books said he â€œdied in the
wilderness, of a broken heart.â€

â€œMore than him has done that,â€ said Antonia sadly, and the girls murmured
assent.

We sat looking off across the country, watching the sun go down. The curly
grass about us was on fire now. The bark of the oaks turned red as copper.
There was a shimmer of gold on the brown river. Out in the stream the
sandbars glittered like glass, and the light trembled in the willow
thickets as if little flames were leaping among them. The breeze sank to
stillness. In the ravine a ringdove mourned plaintively, and somewhere off
in the bushes an owl hooted. The girls sat listless, leaning against each
other. The long fingers of the sun touched their foreheads.

Presently we saw a curious thing: There were no clouds, the sun was going
down in a limpid, gold-washed sky. Just as the lower edge of the red disc
rested on the high fields against the horizon, a great black figure
suddenly appeared on the face of the sun. We sprang to our feet, straining
our eyes toward it. In a moment we realized what it was. On some upland
farm, a plough had been left standing in the field. The sun was sinking
just behind it. Magnified across the distance by the horizontal light, it
stood out against the sun, was exactly contained within the circle of the
disc; the handles, the tongue, the shareâ€”black against the molten red.
There it was, heroic in size, a picture writing on the sun.

Even while we whispered about it, our vision disappeared; the ball dropped
and dropped until the red tip went beneath the earth. The fields below us
were dark, the sky was growing pale, and that forgotten plough had sunk
back to its own littleness somewhere on the prairie.




XV


LATE in August the Cutters went to Omaha for a few days, leaving Antonia
in charge of the house. Since the scandal about the Swedish girl, Wick
Cutter could never get his wife to stir out of Black Hawk without him.

The day after the Cutters left, Antonia came over to see us. Grandmother
noticed that she seemed troubled and distracted. â€œYouâ€™ve got something on
your mind, Antonia,â€ she said anxiously.

â€œYes, Mrs. Burden. I could nâ€™t sleep much last night.â€ She hesitated, and
then told us how strangely Mr. Cutter had behaved before he went away. He
put all the silver in a basket and placed it under her bed, and with it a
box of papers which he told her were valuable. He made her promise that
she would not sleep away from the house, or be out late in the evening,
while he was gone. He strictly forbade her to ask any of the girls she
knew to stay with her at night. She would be perfectly safe, he said, as
he had just put a new Yale lock on the front door.

Cutter had been so insistent in regard to these details that now she felt
uncomfortable about staying there alone. She had nâ€™t liked the way he kept
coming into the kitchen to instruct her, or the way he looked at her. â€œI
feel as if he is up to some of his tricks again, and is going to try to
scare me, somehow.â€

Grandmother was apprehensive at once. â€œI donâ€™t think itâ€™s right for you to
stay there, feeling that way. I suppose it would nâ€™t be right for you to
leave the place alone, either, after giving your word. Maybe Jim would be
willing to go over there and sleep, and you could come here nights. Iâ€™d
feel safer, knowing you were under my own roof. I guess Jim could take
care of their silver and old usury notes as well as you could.â€

Antonia turned to me eagerly. â€œOh, would you, Jim ? Iâ€™d make up my bed nice
and fresh for you. Itâ€™s a real cool room, and the bedâ€™s right next the
window. I was afraid to leave the window open last night.â€

I liked my own room, and I did nâ€™t like the Cuttersâ€™ house under any
circumstances; but Tony looked so troubled that I consented to try this
arrangement. I found that I slept there as well as anywhere, and when I
got home in the morning, Tony had a good breakfast waiting for me. After
prayers she sat down at the table with us, and it was like old times in
the country.

The third night I spent at the Cuttersâ€™, I awoke suddenly with the
impression that I had heard a door open and shut. Everything was still,
however, and I must have gone to sleep again immediately.

The next thing I knew, I felt some one sit down on the edge of the bed. I
was only half awake, but I decided that he might take the Cuttersâ€™ silver,
whoever he was. Perhaps if I did not move, he would find it and get out
without troubling me. I held my breath and lay absolutely still. A hand
closed softly on my shoulder, and at the same moment I felt something
hairy and cologne-scented brushing my face. If the room had suddenly been
flooded with electric light, I could nâ€™t have seen more clearly the
detestable bearded countenance that I knew was bending over me. I caught a
handful of whiskers and pulled, shouting something. The hand that held my
shoulder was instantly at my throat. The man became insane; he stood over
me, choking me with one fist and beating me in the face with the other,
hissing and chuckling and letting out a flood of abuse.

â€œSo this is what sheâ€™s up to when Iâ€™m away, is it ? Where is she, you nasty
whelp, where is she ? Under the bed, are you, hussy ? I know your tricks!
Wait till I get at you! Iâ€™ll fix this rat youâ€™ve got in here. Heâ€™s caught,
all right!â€

So long as Cutter had me by the throat, there was no chance for me at all.
I got hold of his thumb and bent it back, until he let go with a yell. In
a bound, I was on my feet, and easily sent him sprawling to the floor.
Then I made a dive for the open window, struck the wire screen, knocked it
out, and tumbled after it into the yard.

Suddenly I found myself running across the north end of Black Hawk in my
nightshirt, just as one sometimes finds oneâ€™s self behaving in bad dreams.
When I got home I climbed in at the kitchen window. I was covered with
blood from my nose and lip, but I was too sick to do anything about it. I
found a shawl and an overcoat on the hatrack, lay down on the parlor sofa,
and in spite of my hurts, went to sleep.

Grandmother found me there in the morning. Her cry of fright awakened me.
Truly, I was a battered object. As she helped me to my room, I caught a
glimpse of myself in the mirror. My lip was cut and stood out like a
snout. My nose looked like a big blue plum, and one eye was swollen shut
and hideously discolored. Grandmother said we must have the doctor at
once, but I implored her, as I had never begged for anything before, not
to send for him. I could stand anything, I told her, so long as nobody saw
me or knew what had happened to me. I entreated her not to let
grandfather, even, come into my room. She seemed to understand, though I
was too faint and miserable to go into explanations. When she took off my
nightshirt, she found such bruises on my chest and shoulders that she
began to cry. She spent the whole morning bathing and poulticing me, and
rubbing me with arnica. I heard Antonia sobbing outside my door, but I
asked grandmother to send her away. I felt that I never wanted to see her
again. I hated her almost as much as I hated Cutter. She had let me in for
all this disgustingness. Grandmother kept saying how thankful we ought to
be that I had been there instead of Antonia. But I lay with my disfigured
face to the wall and felt no particular gratitude. My one concern was that
grandmother should keep every one away from me. If the story once got
abroad, I would never hear the last of it. I could well imagine what the
old men down at the drug-store would do with such a theme.

While grandmother was trying to make me comfortable, grandfather went to
the depot and learned that Wick Cutter had come home on the night express
from the east, and had left again on the six oâ€™clock train for Denver that
morning. The agent said his face was striped with court-plaster, and he
carried his left hand in a sling. He looked so used up, that the agent
asked him what had happened to him since ten oâ€™clock the night before;
whereat Cutter began to swear at him and said he would have him discharged
for incivility.

That afternoon, while I was asleep, Antonia took grandmother with her, and
went over to the Cuttersâ€™ to pack her trunk. They found the place locked
up, and they had to break the window to get into Antoniaâ€™s bedroom. There
everything was in shocking disorder. Her clothes had been taken out of her
closet, thrown into the middle of the room, and trampled and torn. My own
garments had been treated so badly that I never saw them again;
grandmother burned them in the Cuttersâ€™ kitchen range.

While Antonia was packing her trunk and putting her room in order, to
leave it, the front-door bell rang violently. There stood Mrs.
Cutter,â€”locked out, for she had no key to the new lockâ€”her head trembling
with rage. â€œI advised her to control herself, or she would have a stroke,â€
grandmother said afterwards.

Grandmother would not let her see Antonia at all, but made her sit down in
the parlor while she related to her just what had occurred the night
before. Antonia was frightened, and was going home to stay for a while,
she told Mrs. Cutter; it would be useless to interrogate the girl, for she
knew nothing of what had happened.

Then Mrs. Cutter told her story. She and her husband had started home from
Omaha together the morning before. They had to stop over several hours at
Waymore Junction to catch the Black Hawk train. During the wait, Cutter
left her at the depot and went to the Waymore bank to attend to some
business. When he returned, he told her that he would have to stay
overnight there, but she could go on home. He bought her ticket and put
her on the train. She saw him slip a twenty-dollar bill into her handbag
with her ticket. That bill, she said, should have aroused her suspicions
at onceâ€”but did not.

The trains are never called at little junction towns; everybody knows when
they come in. Mr. Cutter showed his wifeâ€™s ticket to the conductor, and
settled her in her seat before the train moved off. It was not until
nearly nightfall that she discovered she was on the express bound for
Kansas City, that her ticket was made out to that point, and that Cutter
must have planned it so. The conductor told her the Black Hawk train was
due at Waymore twelve minutes after the Kansas City train left. She saw at
once that her husband had played this trick in order to get back to Black
Hawk without her. She had no choice but to go on to Kansas City and take
the first fast train for home.

Cutter could have got home a day earlier than his wife by any one of a
dozen simpler devices; he could have left her in the Omaha hotel, and said
he was going on to Chicago for a few days. But apparently it was part of
his fun to outrage her feelings as much as possible.

â€œMr. Cutter will pay for this, Mrs. Burden. He will pay!â€ Mrs. Cutter
avouched, nodding her horselike head and rolling her eyes.

Grandmother said she had nâ€™t a doubt of it.

Certainly Cutter liked to have his wife think him a devil. In some way he
depended upon the excitement he could arouse in her hysterical nature.
Perhaps he got the feeling of being a rake more from his wifeâ€™s rage and
amazement than from any experiences of his own. His zest in debauchery
might wane, but never Mrs. Cutterâ€™s belief in it. The reckoning with his
wife at the end of an escapade was something he counted onâ€”like the last
powerful liqueur after a long dinner. The one excitement he really could
nâ€™t do without was quarreling with Mrs. Cutter!





BOOK IIIâ€”LENA LINGARD




I


AT the University I had the good fortune to come immediately under the
influence of a brilliant and inspiring young scholar. Gaston Cleric had
arrived in Lincoln only a few weeks earlier than I, to begin his work as
head of the Latin Department. He came West at the suggestion of his
physicians, his health having been enfeebled by a long illness in Italy.
When I took my entrance examinations he was my examiner, and my course was
arranged under his supervision.

I did not go home for my first summer vacation, but stayed in Lincoln,
working off a yearâ€™s Greek, which had been my only condition on entering
the Freshman class. Clericâ€™s doctor advised against his going back to New
England, and except for a few weeks in Colorado, he, too, was in Lincoln
all that summer. We played tennis, read, and took long walks together. I
shall always look back on that time of mental awakening as one of the
happiest in my life. Gaston Cleric introduced me to the world of ideas;
when one first enters that world everything else fades for a time, and all
that went before is as if it had not been. Yet I found curious survivals;
some of the figures of my old life seemed to be waiting for me in the new.

In those days there were many serious young men among the students who had
come up to the University from the farms and the little towns scattered
over the thinly settled State. Some of those boys came straight from the
cornfields with only a summerâ€™s wages in their pockets, hung on through
the four years, shabby and underfed, and completed the course by really
heroic self-sacrifice. Our instructors were oddly assorted; wandering
pioneer school-teachers, stranded ministers of the Gospel, a few
enthusiastic young men just out of graduate schools. There was an
atmosphere of endeavor, of expectancy and bright hopefulness about the
young college that had lifted its head from the prairie only a few years
before.

Our personal life was as free as that of our instructors. There were no
college dormitories; we lived where we could and as we could. I took rooms
with an old couple, early settlers in Lincoln, who had married off their
children and now lived quietly in their house at the edge of town, near
the open country. The house was inconveniently situated for students, and
on that account I got two rooms for the price of one. My bedroom,
originally a linen closet, was unheated and was barely large enough to
contain my cot bed, but it enabled me to call the other room my study. The
dresser, and the great walnut wardrobe which held all my clothes, even my
hats and shoes, I had pushed out of the way, and I considered them
non-existent, as children eliminate incongruous objects when they are
playing house. I worked at a commodious green-topped table placed directly
in front of the west window which looked out over the prairie. In the
corner at my right were all my books, in shelves I had made and painted
myself. On the blank wall at my left the dark, old-fashioned wall-paper
was covered by a large map of ancient Rome, the work of some German
scholar. Cleric had ordered it for me when he was sending for books from
abroad. Over the bookcase hung a photograph of the Tragic Theater at
Pompeii, which he had given me from his collection.

When I sat at work I half faced a deep, upholstered chair which stood at
the end of my table, its high back against the wall. I had bought it with
great care. My instructor sometimes looked in upon me when he was out for
an evening tramp, and I noticed that he was more likely to linger and
become talkative if I had a comfortable chair for him to sit in, and if he
found a bottle of BÃ©nÃ©dictine and plenty of the kind of cigarettes he
liked, at his elbow. He was, I had discovered, parsimonious about small
expendituresâ€”a trait absolutely inconsistent with his general character.
Sometimes when he came he was silent and moody, and after a few sarcastic
remarks went away again, to tramp the streets of Lincoln, which were
almost as quiet and oppressively domestic as those of Black Hawk. Again,
he would sit until nearly midnight, talking about Latin and English
poetry, or telling me about his long stay in Italy.

I can give no idea of the peculiar charm and vividness of his talk. In a
crowd he was nearly always silent. Even for his classroom he had no
platitudes, no stock of professorial anecdotes. When he was tired his
lectures were clouded, obscure, elliptical; but when he was interested
they were wonderful. I believe that Gaston Cleric narrowly missed being a
great poet, and I have sometimes thought that his bursts of imaginative
talk were fatal to his poetic gift. He squandered too much in the heat of
personal communication. How often I have seen him draw his dark brows
together, fix his eyes upon some object on the wall or a figure in the
carpet, and then flash into the lamplight the very image that was in his
brain. He could bring the drama of antique life before one out of the
shadowsâ€”white figures against blue backgrounds. I shall never forget his
face as it looked one night when he told me about the solitary day he
spent among the sea temples at Paestum: the soft wind blowing through the
roofless columns, the birds flying low over the flowering marsh grasses,
the changing lights on the silver, cloud-hung mountains. He had willfully
stayed the short summer night there, wrapped in his coat and rug, watching
the constellations on their path down the sky until â€œthe bride of old
Tithonusâ€ rose out of the sea, and the mountains stood sharp in the dawn.
It was there he caught the fever which held him back on the eve of his
departure for Greece and of which he lay ill so long in Naples. He was
still, indeed, doing penance for it.

I remember vividly another evening, when something led us to talk of
Danteâ€™s veneration for Virgil. Cleric went through canto after canto of
the â€œCommedia,â€ repeating the discourse between Dante and his â€œsweet
teacher,â€ while his cigarette burned itself out unheeded between his long
fingers. I can hear him now, speaking the lines of the poet Statius, who
spoke for Dante: â€œ_I was famous on earth with the name which endures
longest and honors most. The seeds of my ardor were the sparks from that
divine flame whereby more than a thousand have kindled; I speak of the
Ã†neid, mother to me and nurse to me in poetry._â€

Although I admired scholarship so much in Cleric, I was not deceived about
myself; I knew that I should never be a scholar. I could never lose myself
for long among impersonal things. Mental excitement was apt to send me
with a rush back to my own naked land and the figures scattered upon it.
While I was in the very act of yearning toward the new forms that Cleric
brought up before me, my mind plunged away from me, and I suddenly found
myself thinking of the places and people of my own infinitesimal past.
They stood out strengthened and simplified now, like the image of the
plough against the sun. They were all I had for an answer to the new
appeal. I begrudged the room that Jake and Otto and Russian Peter took up
in my memory, which I wanted to crowd with other things. But whenever my
consciousness was quickened, all those early friends were quickened within
it, and in some strange way they accompanied me through all my new
experiences. They were so much alive in me that I scarcely stopped to
wonder whether they were alive anywhere else, or how.




II


ONE March evening in my Sophomore year I was sitting alone in my room
after supper. There had been a warm thaw all day, with mushy yards and
little streams of dark water gurgling cheerfully into the streets out of
old snow-banks. My window was open, and the earthy wind blowing through
made me indolent. On the edge of the prairie, where the sun had gone down,
the sky was turquoise blue, like a lake, with gold light throbbing in it.
Higher up, in the utter clarity of the western slope, the evening star
hung like a lamp suspended by silver chainsâ€”like the lamp engraved upon
the title-page of old Latin texts, which is always appearing in new
heavens, and waking new desires in men. It reminded me, at any rate, to
shut my window and light my wick in answer. I did so regretfully, and the
dim objects in the room emerged from the shadows and took their place
about me with the helpfulness which custom breeds.

I propped my book open and stared listlessly at the page of the Georgics
where to-morrowâ€™s lesson began. It opened with the melancholy reflection
that, in the lives of mortals, the best days are the first to flee.
â€œOptima dies â€¦ prima fugit.â€ I turned back to the beginning of the third
book, which we had read in class that morning. â€œPrimus ego in patriam
mecum â€¦ deducam Musasâ€; â€œfor I shall be the first, if I live, to bring the
Muse into my country.â€ Cleric had explained to us that â€œpatriaâ€ here
meant, not a nation or even a province, but the little rural neighborhood
on the Mincio where the poet was born. This was not a boast, but a hope,
at once bold and devoutly humble, that he might bring the Muse (but lately
come to Italy from her cloudy Grecian mountains), not to the capital, the
palatia Romana, but to his own little â€œcountryâ€; to his fatherâ€™s fields,
â€œsloping down to the river and to the old beech trees with broken tops.â€

Cleric said he thought Virgil, when he was dying at Brindisi, must have
remembered that passage. After he had faced the bitter fact that he was to
leave the Ã†neid unfinished, and had decreed that the great canvas, crowded
with figures of gods and men, should be burned rather than survive him
unperfected, then his mind must have gone back to the perfect utterance of
the Georgics, where the pen was fitted to the matter as the plough is to
the furrow; and he must have said to himself with the thankfulness of a
good man, â€œI was the first to bring the Muse into my country.â€

We left the classroom quietly, conscious that we had been brushed by the
wing of a great feeling, though perhaps I alone knew Cleric intimately
enough to guess what that feeling was. In the evening, as I sat staring at
my book, the fervor of his voice stirred through the quantities on the
page before me. I was wondering whether that particular rocky strip of New
England coast about which he had so often told me was Clericâ€™s patria.
Before I had got far with my reading I was disturbed by a knock. I hurried
to the door and when I opened it saw a woman standing in the dark hall.

â€œI expect you hardly know me, Jim.â€

The voice seemed familiar, but I did not recognize her until she stepped
into the light of my doorway and I beheldâ€”Lena Lingard! She was so quietly
conventionalized by city clothes that I might have passed her on the
street without seeing her. Her black suit fitted her figure smoothly, and
a black lace hat, with pale-blue forget-me-nots, sat demurely on her
yellow hair.

I led her toward Clericâ€™s chair, the only comfortable one I had,
questioning her confusedly.

She was not disconcerted by my embarrassment. She looked about her with
the naÃ¯ve curiosity I remembered so well. â€œYou are quite comfortable here,
are nâ€™t you ? I live in Lincoln now, too, Jim. Iâ€™m in business for myself.
I have a dressmaking shop in the Raleigh Block, out on O Street. Iâ€™ve made
a real good start.â€

â€œBut, Lena, when did you come ?â€

â€œOh, Iâ€™ve been here all winter. Did nâ€™t your grandmother ever write you ?
Iâ€™ve thought about looking you up lots of times. But weâ€™ve all heard what
a studious young man youâ€™ve got to be, and I felt bashful. I did nâ€™t know
whether youâ€™d be glad to see me.â€ She laughed her mellow, easy laugh, that
was either very artless or very comprehending, one never quite knew which.
â€œYou seem the same, though,â€”except youâ€™re a young man, now, of course. Do
you think Iâ€™ve changed ?â€

â€œMaybe youâ€™re prettierâ€”though you were always pretty enough. Perhaps itâ€™s
your clothes that make a difference.â€

â€œYou like my new suit ? I have to dress pretty well in my business.â€ She
took off her jacket and sat more at ease in her blouse, of some soft,
flimsy silk. She was already at home in my place, had slipped quietly into
it, as she did into everything. She told me her business was going well,
and she had saved a little money.

â€œThis summer Iâ€™m going to build the house for mother Iâ€™ve talked about so
long. I wonâ€™t be able to pay up on it at first, but I want her to have it
before she is too old to enjoy it. Next summer Iâ€™ll take her down new
furniture and carpets, so sheâ€™ll have something to look forward to all
winter.â€

I watched Lena sitting there so smooth and sunny and well cared-for, and
thought of how she used to run barefoot over the prairie until after the
snow began to fly, and how Crazy Mary chased her round and round the
cornfields. It seemed to me wonderful that she should have got on so well
in the world. Certainly she had no one but herself to thank for it.

â€œYou must feel proud of yourself, Lena,â€ I said heartily. â€œLook at me;
Iâ€™ve never earned a dollar, and I donâ€™t know that Iâ€™ll ever be able to.â€

â€œTony says youâ€™re going to be richer than Mr. Harling some day. Sheâ€™s
always bragging about you, you know.â€

â€œTell me, how _is_ Tony ?â€

â€œSheâ€™s fine. She works for Mrs. Gardener at the hotel now. Sheâ€™s
housekeeper. Mrs. Gardenerâ€™s health is nâ€™t what it was, and she canâ€™t see
after everything like she used to. She has great confidence in Tony.
Tonyâ€™s made it up with the Harlings, too. Little Nina is so fond of her
that Mrs. Harling kind of overlooked things.â€

â€œIs she still going with Larry Donovan ?â€

â€œOh, thatâ€™s on, worse than ever! I guess theyâ€™re engaged. Tony talks about
him like he was president of the railroad. Everybody laughs about it,
because she was never a girl to be soft. She wonâ€™t hear a word against
him. Sheâ€™s so sort of innocent.â€

I said I did nâ€™t like Larry, and never would.

Lenaâ€™s face dimpled. â€œSome of us could tell her things, but it would nâ€™t
do any good. Sheâ€™d always believe him. Thatâ€™s Antoniaâ€™s failing, you know;
if she once likes people, she wonâ€™t hear anything against them.â€

â€œI think Iâ€™d better go home and look after Antonia,â€ I said.

â€œI think you had.â€ Lena looked up at me in frank amusement. â€œItâ€™s a good
thing the Harlings are friendly with her again. Larryâ€™s afraid of them.
They ship so much grain, they have influence with the railroad people.
What are you studying ?â€ She leaned her elbows on the table and drew my
book toward her. I caught a faint odor of violet sachet. â€œSo thatâ€™s Latin,
is it ? It looks hard. You do go to the theater sometimes, though, for Iâ€™ve
seen you there. Donâ€™t you just love a good play, Jim ? I canâ€™t stay at home
in the evening if thereâ€™s one in town. Iâ€™d be willing to work like a
slave, it seems to me, to live in a place where there are theaters.â€

â€œLetâ€™s go to a show together sometime. You are going to let me come to see
you, are nâ€™t you ?â€

â€œWould you like to ? Iâ€™d be ever so pleased. Iâ€™m never busy after six
oâ€™clock, and I let my sewing girls go at half-past five. I board, to save
time, but sometimes I cook a chop for myself, and Iâ€™d be glad to cook one
for you. Well,â€â€”she began to put on her white gloves,â€”â€œitâ€™s been awful
good to see you, Jim.â€

â€œYou need nâ€™t hurry, need you ? Youâ€™ve hardly told me anything yet.â€

â€œWe can talk when you come to see me. I expect you donâ€™t often have lady
visitors. The old woman downstairs did nâ€™t want to let me come up very
much. I told her I was from your home town, and had promised your
grandmother to come and see you. How surprised Mrs. Burden would be!â€ Lena
laughed softly as she rose.

When I caught up my hat she shook her head. â€œNo, I donâ€™t want you to go
with me. Iâ€™m to meet some Swedes at the drug-store. You would nâ€™t care for
them. I wanted to see your room so I could write Tony all about it, but I
must tell her how I left you right here with your books. Sheâ€™s always so
afraid some one will run off with you!â€ Lena slipped her silk sleeves into
the jacket I held for her, smoothed it over her person, and buttoned it
slowly. I walked with her to the door. â€œCome and see me sometimes when
youâ€™re lonesome. But maybe you have all the friends you want. Have you ?â€
She turned her soft cheek to me. â€œHave you ?â€ she whispered teasingly in my
ear. In a moment I watched her fade down the dusky stairway.



When I turned back to my room the place seemed much pleasanter than
before. Lena had left something warm and friendly in the lamplight. How I
loved to hear her laugh again! It was so soft and unexcited and
appreciativeâ€”gave a favorable interpretation to everything. When I closed
my eyes I could hear them all laughingâ€”the Danish laundry girls and the
three Bohemian Marys. Lena had brought them all back to me. It came over
me, as it had never done before, the relation between girls like those and
the poetry of Virgil. If there were no girls like them in the world, there
would be no poetry. I understood that clearly, for the first time. This
revelation seemed to me inestimably precious. I clung to it as if it might
suddenly vanish.

As I sat down to my book at last, my old dream about Lena coming across
the harvest field in her short skirt seemed to me like the memory of an
actual experience. It floated before me on the page like a picture, and
underneath it stood the mournful line: Optima dies â€¦ prima fugit.




III


IN Lincoln the best part of the theatrical season came late, when the good
companies stopped off there for one-night stands, after their long runs in
New York and Chicago. That spring Lena went with me to see Joseph
Jefferson in â€œRip Van Winkle,â€ and to a war play called â€œShenandoah.â€ She
was inflexible about paying for her own seat; said she was in business
now, and she would nâ€™t have a schoolboy spending his money on her. I liked
to watch a play with Lena; everything was wonderful to her, and everything
was true. It was like going to revival meetings with some one who was
always being converted. She handed her feelings over to the actors with a
kind of fatalistic resignation. Accessories of costume and scene meant
much more to her than to me. She sat entranced through â€œRobin Hoodâ€ and
hung upon the lips of the contralto who sang, â€œOh, Promise Me!â€

Toward the end of April, the billboards, which I watched anxiously in
those days, bloomed out one morning with gleaming white posters on which
two names were impressively printed in blue Gothic letters: the name of an
actress of whom I had often heard, and the name â€œCamille.â€

I called at the Raleigh Block for Lena on Saturday evening, and we walked
down to the theater. The weather was warm and sultry and put us both in a
holiday humor. We arrived early, because Lena liked to watch the people
come in. There was a note on the programme, saying that the â€œincidental
musicâ€ would be from the opera â€œTraviata,â€ which was made from the same
story as the play. We had neither of us read the play, and we did not know
what it was aboutâ€”though I seemed to remember having heard it was a piece
in which great actresses shone. â€œThe Count of Monte Cristo,â€ which I had
seen James Oâ€™Neill play that winter, was by the only Alexandre Dumas I
knew. This play, I saw, was by his son, and I expected a family
resemblance. A couple of jack-rabbits, run in off the prairie, could not
have been more innocent of what awaited them than were Lena and I.

Our excitement began with the rise of the curtain, when the moody
Varville, seated before the fire, interrogated Nanine. Decidedly, there
was a new tang about this dialogue. I had never heard in the theater lines
that were alive, that presupposed and took for granted, like those which
passed between Varville and Marguerite in the brief encounter before her
friends entered. This introduced the most brilliant, worldly, the most
enchantingly gay scene I had ever looked upon. I had never seen champagne
bottles opened on the stage beforeâ€”indeed, I had never seen them opened
anywhere. The memory of that supper makes me hungry now; the sight of it
then, when I had only a studentsâ€™ boarding-house dinner behind me, was
delicate torment. I seem to remember gilded chairs and tables (arranged
hurriedly by footmen in white gloves and stockings), linen of dazzling
whiteness, glittering glass, silver dishes, a great bowl of fruit, and the
reddest of roses. The room was invaded by beautiful women and dashing
young men, laughing and talking together. The men were dressed more or
less after the period in which the play was written; the women were not. I
saw no inconsistency. Their talk seemed to open to one the brilliant world
in which they lived; every sentence made one older and wiser, every
pleasantry enlarged oneâ€™s horizon. One could experience excess and satiety
without the inconvenience of learning what to do with oneâ€™s hands in a
drawing-room! When the characters all spoke at once and I missed some of
the phrases they flashed at each other, I was in misery. I strained my
ears and eyes to catch every exclamation.

The actress who played Marguerite was even then old-fashioned, though
historic. She had been a member of Dalyâ€™s famous New York company, and
afterward a â€œstarâ€ under his direction. She was a woman who could not be
taught, it is said, though she had a crude natural force which carried
with people whose feelings were accessible and whose taste was not
squeamish. She was already old, with a ravaged countenance and a physique
curiously hard and stiff. She moved with difficultyâ€”I think she was lameâ€”I
seem to remember some story about a malady of the spine. Her Armand was
disproportionately young and slight, a handsome youth, perplexed in the
extreme. But what did it matter ? I believed devoutly in her power to
fascinate him, in her dazzling loveliness. I believed her young, ardent,
reckless, disillusioned, under sentence, feverish, avid of pleasure. I
wanted to cross the footlights and help the slim-waisted Armand in the
frilled shirt to convince her that there was still loyalty and devotion in
the world. Her sudden illness, when the gayety was at its height, her
pallor, the handkerchief she crushed against her lips, the cough she
smothered under the laughter while Gaston kept playing the piano
lightlyâ€”it all wrung my heart. But not so much as her cynicism in the long
dialogue with her lover which followed. How far was I from questioning her
unbelief! While the charmingly sincere young man pleaded with
herâ€”accompanied by the orchestra in the old â€œTraviataâ€ duet, â€œmisterioso,
misterioso!â€â€”she maintained her bitter skepticism, and the curtain fell on
her dancing recklessly with the others, after Armand had been sent away
with his flower.

Between the acts we had no time to forget. The orchestra kept sawing away
at the â€œTraviataâ€ music, so joyous and sad, so thin and far-away, so
clap-trap and yet so heart-breaking. After the second act I left Lena in
tearful contemplation of the ceiling, and went out into the lobby to
smoke. As I walked about there I congratulated myself that I had not
brought some Lincoln girl who would talk during the waits about the Junior
dances, or whether the cadets would camp at Plattsmouth. Lena was at least
a woman, and I was a man.

Through the scene between Marguerite and the elder Duval, Lena wept
unceasingly, and I sat helpless to prevent the closing of that chapter of
idyllic love, dreading the return of the young man whose ineffable
happiness was only to be the measure of his fall.

I suppose no woman could have been further in person, voice, and
temperament from Dumasâ€™ appealing heroine than the veteran actress who
first acquainted me with her. Her conception of the character was as heavy
and uncompromising as her diction; she bore hard on the idea and on the
consonants. At all times she was highly tragic, devoured by remorse.
Lightness of stress or behavior was far from her. Her voice was heavy and
deep: â€œAr-r-r-mond!â€ she would begin, as if she were summoning him to the
bar of Judgment. But the lines were enough. She had only to utter them.
They created the character in spite of her.

The heartless world which Marguerite re-entered with Varville had never
been so glittering and reckless as on the night when it gathered in
Olympeâ€™s salon for the fourth act. There were chandeliers hung from the
ceiling, I remember, many servants in livery, gaming-tables where the men
played with piles of gold, and a staircase down which the guests made
their entrance. After all the others had gathered round the card tables,
and young Duval had been warned by Prudence, Marguerite descended the
staircase with Varville; such a cloak, such a fan, such jewelsâ€”and her
face! One knew at a glance how it was with her. When Armand, with the
terrible words, â€œLook, all of you, I owe this woman nothing!â€ flung the
gold and bank-notes at the half-swooning Marguerite, Lena cowered beside
me and covered her face with her hands.

The curtain rose on the bedroom scene. By this time there was nâ€™t a nerve
in me that had nâ€™t been twisted. Nanine alone could have made me cry. I
loved Nanine tenderly; and Gaston, how one clung to that good fellow! The
New Yearâ€™s presents were not too much; nothing could be too much now. I
wept unrestrainedly. Even the handkerchief in my breast-pocket, worn for
elegance and not at all for use, was wet through by the time that moribund
woman sank for the last time into the arms of her lover.

When we reached the door of the theater, the streets were shining with
rain. I had prudently brought along Mrs. Harlingâ€™s useful Commencement
present, and I took Lena home under its shelter. After leaving her, I
walked slowly out into the country part of the town where I lived. The
lilacs were all blooming in the yards, and the smell of them after the
rain, of the new leaves and the blossoms together, blew into my face with
a sort of bitter sweetness. I tramped through the puddles and under the
showery trees, mourning for Marguerite Gauthier as if she had died only
yesterday, sighing with the spirit of 1840, which had sighed so much, and
which had reached me only that night, across long years and several
languages, through the person of an infirm old actress. The idea is one
that no circumstances can frustrate. Wherever and whenever that piece is
put on, it is April.




IV


HOW well I remember the stiff little parlor where I used to wait for Lena:
the hard horsehair furniture, bought at some auction sale, the long
mirror, the fashion-plates on the wall. If I sat down even for a moment I
was sure to find threads and bits of colored silk clinging to my clothes
after I went away. Lenaâ€™s success puzzled me. She was so easy-going; had
none of the push and self-assertiveness that get people ahead in business.
She had come to Lincoln, a country girl, with no introductions except to
some cousins of Mrs. Thomas who lived there, and she was already making
clothes for the women of â€œthe young married set.â€ She evidently had great
natural aptitude for her work. She knew, as she said, â€œwhat people looked
well in.â€ She never tired of poring over fashion books. Sometimes in the
evening I would find her alone in her work-room, draping folds of satin on
a wire figure, with a quite blissful expression of countenance. I could
nâ€™t help thinking that the years when Lena literally had nâ€™t enough
clothes to cover herself might have something to do with her untiring
interest in dressing the human figure. Her clients said that Lena â€œhad
style,â€ and overlooked her habitual inaccuracies. She never, I discovered,
finished anything by the time she had promised, and she frequently spent
more money on materials than her customer had authorized. Once, when I
arrived at six oâ€™clock, Lena was ushering out a fidgety mother and her
awkward, overgrown daughter. The woman detained Lena at the door to say
apologetically:â€”

â€œYouâ€™ll try to keep it under fifty for me, wonâ€™t you, Miss Lingard ? You
see, sheâ€™s really too young to come to an expensive dressmaker, but I knew
you could do more with her than anybody else.â€

â€œOh, that will be all right, Mrs. Herron. I think weâ€™ll manage to get a
good effect,â€ Lena replied blandly.

I thought her manner with her customers very good, and wondered where she
had learned such self-possession.

Sometimes after my morning classes were over, I used to encounter Lena
downtown, in her velvet suit and a little black hat, with a veil tied
smoothly over her face, looking as fresh as the spring morning. Maybe she
would be carrying home a bunch of jonquils or a hyacinth plant. When we
passed a candy store her footsteps would hesitate and linger. â€œDonâ€™t let
me go in,â€ she would murmur. â€œGet me by if you can.â€ She was very fond of
sweets, and was afraid of growing too plump.

We had delightful Sunday breakfasts together at Lenaâ€™s. At the back of her
long work-room was a bay-window, large enough to hold a box-couch and a
reading-table. We breakfasted in this recess, after drawing the curtains
that shut out the long room, with cutting-tables and wire women and
sheet-draped garments on the walls. The sunlight poured in, making
everything on the table shine and glitter and the flame of the alcohol
lamp disappear altogether. Lenaâ€™s curly black water-spaniel, Prince,
breakfasted with us. He sat beside her on the couch and behaved very well
until the Polish violin-teacher across the hall began to practice, when
Prince would growl and sniff the air with disgust. Lenaâ€™s landlord, old
Colonel Raleigh, had given her the dog, and at first she was not at all
pleased. She had spent too much of her life taking care of animals to have
much sentiment about them. But Prince was a knowing little beast, and she
grew fond of him. After breakfast I made him do his lessons; play dead
dog, shake hands, stand up like a soldier. We used to put my cadet cap on
his headâ€”I had to take military drill at the Universityâ€”and give him a
yard-measure to hold with his front leg. His gravity made us laugh
immoderately.

Lenaâ€™s talk always amused me. Antonia had never talked like the people
about her. Even after she learned to speak English readily there was
always something impulsive and foreign in her speech. But Lena had picked
up all the conventional expressions she heard at Mrs. Thomasâ€™s dressmaking
shop. Those formal phrases, the very flower of small-town proprieties, and
the flat commonplaces, nearly all hypocritical in their origin, became
very funny, very engaging, when they were uttered in Lenaâ€™s soft voice,
with her caressing intonation and arch naÃ¯vetÃ©. Nothing could be more
diverting than to hear Lena, who was almost as candid as Nature, call a
leg a â€œlimbâ€ or a house a â€œhome.â€

We used to linger a long while over our coffee in that sunny corner. Lena
was never so pretty as in the morning; she wakened fresh with the world
every day, and her eyes had a deeper color then, like the blue flowers
that are never so blue as when they first open. I could sit idle all
through a Sunday morning and look at her. Ole Bensonâ€™s behavior was now no
mystery to me.

â€œThere was never any harm in Ole,â€ she said once. â€œPeople need nâ€™t have
troubled themselves. He just liked to come over and sit on the draw-side
and forget about his bad luck. I liked to have him. Any companyâ€™s welcome
when youâ€™re off with cattle all the time.â€

â€œBut was nâ€™t he always glum ?â€ I asked. â€œPeople said he never talked at
all.â€

â€œSure he talked, in Norwegian. Heâ€™d been a sailor on an English boat and
had seen lots of queer places. He had wonderful tattoos. We used to sit
and look at them for hours; there was nâ€™t much to look at out there. He
was like a picture book. He had a ship and a strawberry girl on one arm,
and on the other a girl standing before a little house, with a fence and
gate and all, waiting for her sweetheart. Farther up his arm, her sailor
had come back and was kissing her. â€˜The Sailorâ€™s Return,â€™ he called it.â€

I admitted it was no wonder Ole liked to look at a pretty girl once in a
while, with such a fright at home.

â€œYou know,â€ Lena said confidentially, â€œhe married Mary because he thought
she was strong-minded and would keep him straight. He never could keep
straight on shore. The last time he landed in Liverpool heâ€™d been out on a
two yearsâ€™ voyage. He was paid off one morning, and by the next he had nâ€™t
a cent left, and his watch and compass were gone. Heâ€™d got with some
women, and theyâ€™d taken everything. He worked his way to this country on a
little passenger boat. Mary was a stewardess, and she tried to convert him
on the way over. He thought she was just the one to keep him steady. Poor
Ole! He used to bring me candy from town, hidden in his feed-bag. He could
nâ€™t refuse anything to a girl. Heâ€™d have given away his tattoos long ago,
if he could. Heâ€™s one of the people Iâ€™m sorriest for.â€

If I happened to spend an evening with Lena and stayed late, the Polish
violin-teacher across the hall used to come out and watch me descend the
stairs, muttering so threateningly that it would have been easy to fall
into a quarrel with him. Lena had told him once that she liked to hear him
practice, so he always left his door open, and watched who came and went.

There was a coolness between the Pole and Lenaâ€™s landlord on her account.
Old Colonel Raleigh had come to Lincoln from Kentucky and invested an
inherited fortune in real estate, at the time of inflated prices. Now he
sat day after day in his office in the Raleigh Block, trying to discover
where his money had gone and how he could get some of it back. He was a
widower, and found very little congenial companionship in this casual
Western city. Lenaâ€™s good looks and gentle manners appealed to him. He
said her voice reminded him of Southern voices, and he found as many
opportunities of hearing it as possible. He painted and papered her rooms
for her that spring, and put in a porcelain bathtub in place of the tin
one that had satisfied the former tenant. While these repairs were being
made, the old gentleman often dropped in to consult Lenaâ€™s preferences.
She told me with amusement how Ordinsky, the Pole, had presented himself
at her door one evening, and said that if the landlord was annoying her by
his attentions, he would promptly put a stop to it.

â€œI donâ€™t exactly know what to do about him,â€ she said, shaking her head,
â€œheâ€™s so sort of wild all the time. I would nâ€™t like to have him say
anything rough to that nice old man. The Colonel is long-winded, but then
I expect heâ€™s lonesome. I donâ€™t think he cares much for Ordinsky, either.
He said once that if I had any complaints to make of my neighbors, I must
nâ€™t hesitate.â€

One Saturday evening when I was having supper with Lena we heard a knock
at her parlor door, and there stood the Pole, coatless, in a dress shirt
and collar. Prince dropped on his paws and began to growl like a mastiff,
while the visitor apologized, saying that he could not possibly come in
thus attired, but he begged Lena to lend him some safety pins.

â€œOh, youâ€™ll have to come in, Mr. Ordinsky, and let me see whatâ€™s the
matter.â€ She closed the door behind him. â€œJim, wonâ€™t you make Prince
behave ?â€

I rapped Prince on the nose, while Ordinsky explained that he had not had
his dress clothes on for a long time, and to-night, when he was going to
play for a concert, his waistcoat had split down the back. He thought he
could pin it together until he got it to a tailor.

Lena took him by the elbow and turned him round. She laughed when she saw
the long gap in the satin. â€œYou could never pin that, Mr. Ordinsky. Youâ€™ve
kept it folded too long, and the goods is all gone along the crease. Take
it off. I can put a new piece of lining-silk in there for you in ten
minutes.â€ She disappeared into her work-room with the vest, leaving me to
confront the Pole, who stood against the door like a wooden figure. He
folded his arms and glared at me with his excitable, slanting brown eyes.
His head was the shape of a chocolate drop, and was covered with dry,
straw-colored hair that fuzzed up about his pointed crown. He had never
done more than mutter at me as I passed him, and I was surprised when he
now addressed me.

â€œMiss Lingard,â€ he said haughtily, â€œis a young woman for whom I have the
utmost, the utmost respect.â€

â€œSo have I,â€ I said coldly.

He paid no heed to my remark, but began to do rapid finger-exercises on
his shirt-sleeves, as he stood with tightly folded arms.

â€œKindness of heart,â€ he went on, staring at the ceiling, â€œsentiment, are
not understood in a place like this. The noblest qualities are ridiculed.
Grinning college boys, ignorant and conceited, what do they know of
delicacy!â€

I controlled my features and tried to speak seriously.

â€œIf you mean me, Mr. Ordinsky, I have known Miss Lingard a long time, and
I think I appreciate her kindness. We come from the same town, and we grew
up together.â€

His gaze traveled slowly down from the ceiling and rested on me. â€œAm I to
understand that you have this young womanâ€™s interests at heart ? That you
do not wish to compromise her ?â€

â€œThatâ€™s a word we donâ€™t use much here, Mr. Ordinsky. A girl who makes her
own living can ask a college boy to supper without being talked about. We
take some things for granted.â€

â€œThen I have misjudged you, and I ask your pardon,â€â€”he bowed gravely.
â€œMiss Lingard,â€ he went on, â€œis an absolutely trustful heart. She has not
learned the hard lessons of life. As for you and me, noblesse oblige,â€â€”he
watched me narrowly.

Lena returned with the vest. â€œCome in and let us look at you as you go
out, Mr. Ordinsky. Iâ€™ve never seen you in your dress suit,â€ she said as
she opened the door for him.

A few moments later he reappeared with his violin caseâ€”a heavy muffler
about his neck and thick woolen gloves on his bony hands. Lena spoke
encouragingly to him, and he went off with such an important, professional
air, that we fell to laughing as soon as we had shut the door. â€œPoor
fellow,â€ Lena said indulgently, â€œhe takes everything so hard.â€

After that Ordinsky was friendly to me, and behaved as if there were some
deep understanding between us. He wrote a furious article, attacking the
musical taste of the town, and asked me to do him a great service by
taking it to the editor of the morning paper. If the editor refused to
print it, I was to tell him that he would be answerable to Ordinsky â€œin
person.â€ He declared that he would never retract one word, and that he was
quite prepared to lose all his pupils. In spite of the fact that nobody
ever mentioned his article to him after it appearedâ€”full of typographical
errors which he thought intentionalâ€”he got a certain satisfaction from
believing that the citizens of Lincoln had meekly accepted the epithet
â€œcoarse barbarians.â€ â€œYou see how it is,â€ he said to me, â€œwhere there is
no chivalry, there is no amour propre.â€ When I met him on his rounds now,
I thought he carried his head more disdainfully than ever, and strode up
the steps of front porches and rang doorbells with more assurance. He told
Lena he would never forget how I had stood by him when he was â€œunder
fire.â€

All this time, of course, I was drifting. Lena had broken up my serious
mood. I was nâ€™t interested in my classes. I played with Lena and Prince, I
played with the Pole, I went buggy-riding with the old Colonel, who had
taken a fancy to me and used to talk to me about Lena and the â€œgreat
beautiesâ€ he had known in his youth. We were all three in love with Lena.

Before the first of June, Gaston Cleric was offered an instructorship at
Harvard College, and accepted it. He suggested that I should follow him in
the fall, and complete my course at Harvard. He had found out about
Lenaâ€”not from meâ€”and he talked to me seriously.

â€œYou wonâ€™t do anything here now. You should either quit school and go to
work, or change your college and begin again in earnest. You wonâ€™t recover
yourself while you are playing about with this handsome Norwegian. Yes,
Iâ€™ve seen her with you at the theater. Sheâ€™s very pretty, and perfectly
irresponsible, I should judge.â€

Cleric wrote my grandfather that he would like to take me East with him.
To my astonishment, grandfather replied that I might go if I wished. I was
both glad and sorry on the day when the letter came. I stayed in my room
all evening and thought things over; I even tried to persuade myself that
I was standing in Lenaâ€™s wayâ€”it is so necessary to be a little noble!â€”and
that if she had not me to play with, she would probably marry and secure
her future.

The next evening I went to call on Lena. I found her propped up on the
couch in her bay window, with her foot in a big slipper. An awkward little
Russian girl whom she had taken into her work-room had dropped a flat-iron
on Lenaâ€™s toe. On the table beside her there was a basket of early summer
flowers which the Pole had left after he heard of the accident. He always
managed to know what went on in Lenaâ€™s apartment.

Lena was telling me some amusing piece of gossip about one of her clients,
when I interrupted her and picked up the flower basket.

â€œThis old chap will be proposing to you some day, Lena.â€

â€œOh, he hasâ€”often!â€ she murmured.

â€œWhat! After youâ€™ve refused him ?â€

â€œHe does nâ€™t mind that. It seems to cheer him to mention the subject. Old
men are like that, you know. It makes them feel important to think theyâ€™re
in love with somebody.â€

â€œThe Colonel would marry you in a minute. I hope you wonâ€™t marry some old
fellow; not even a rich one.â€

Lena shifted her pillows and looked up at me in surprise. â€œWhy, Iâ€™m not
going to marry anybody. Did nâ€™t you know that ?â€

â€œNonsense, Lena. Thatâ€™s what girls say, but you know better. Every
handsome girl like you marries, of course.â€

She shook her head. â€œNot me.â€

â€œBut why not ? What makes you say that ?â€ I persisted.

Lena laughed. â€œWell, itâ€™s mainly because I donâ€™t want a husband. Men are
all right for friends, but as soon as you marry them they turn into cranky
old fathers, even the wild ones. They begin to tell you whatâ€™s sensible
and whatâ€™s foolish, and want you to stick at home all the time. I prefer
to be foolish when I feel like it, and be accountable to nobody.â€

â€œBut youâ€™ll be lonesome. Youâ€™ll get tired of this sort of life, and youâ€™ll
want a family.â€

â€œNot me. I like to be lonesome. When I went to work for Mrs. Thomas I was
nineteen years old, and I had never slept a night in my life when there
were nâ€™t three in the bed. I never had a minute to myself except when I
was off with the cattle.â€

Usually, when Lena referred to her life in the country at all, she
dismissed it with a single remark, humorous or mildly cynical. But
to-night her mind seemed to dwell on those early years. She told me she
could nâ€™t remember a time when she was so little that she was nâ€™t lugging
a heavy baby about, helping to wash for babies, trying to keep their
little chapped hands and faces clean. She remembered home as a place where
there were always too many children, a cross man, and work piling up
around a sick woman.

â€œIt was nâ€™t motherâ€™s fault. She would have made us comfortable if she
could. But that was no life for a girl! After I began to herd and milk I
could never get the smell of the cattle off me. The few underclothes I had
I kept in a cracker box. On Saturday nights, after everybody was in bed,
then I could take a bath if I was nâ€™t too tired. I could make two trips to
the windmill to carry water, and heat it in the wash-boiler on the stove.
While the water was heating, I could bring in a washtub out of the cave,
and take my bath in the kitchen. Then I could put on a clean nightgown and
get into bed with two others, who likely had nâ€™t had a bath unless Iâ€™d
given it to them. You canâ€™t tell me anything about family life. Iâ€™ve had
plenty to last me.â€

â€œBut itâ€™s not all like that,â€ I objected.

â€œNear enough. Itâ€™s all being under somebodyâ€™s thumb. Whatâ€™s on your mind,
Jim ? Are you afraid Iâ€™ll want you to marry me some day ?â€

Then I told her I was going away.

â€œWhat makes you want to go away, Jim ? Have nâ€™t I been nice to you ?â€

â€œYouâ€™ve been just awfully good to me, Lena,â€ I blurted. â€œI donâ€™t think
about much else. I never shall think about much else while Iâ€™m with you.
Iâ€™ll never settle down and grind if I stay here. You know that.â€ I dropped
down beside her and sat looking at the floor. I seemed to have forgotten
all my reasonable explanations.

Lena drew close to me, and the little hesitation in her voice that had
hurt me was not there when she spoke again.

â€œI ought nâ€™t to have begun it, ought I ?â€ she murmured. â€œI ought nâ€™t to
have gone to see you that first time. But I did want to. I guess Iâ€™ve
always been a little foolish about you. I donâ€™t know what first put it
into my head, unless it was Antonia, always telling me I must nâ€™t be up to
any of my nonsense with you. I let you alone for a long while, though, did
nâ€™t I ?â€

She was a sweet creature to those she loved, that Lena Lingard!

At last she sent me away with her soft, slow, renunciatory kiss. â€œYou are
nâ€™t sorry I came to see you that time ?â€ she whispered. â€œIt seemed so
natural. I used to think Iâ€™d like to be your first sweetheart. You were
such a funny kid!â€ She always kissed one as if she were sadly and wisely
sending one away forever.

We said many good-byes before I left Lincoln, but she never tried to
hinder me or hold me back. â€œYou are going, but you have nâ€™t gone yet, have
you ?â€ she used to say.

My Lincoln chapter closed abruptly. I went home to my grandparents for a
few weeks, and afterward visited my relatives in Virginia until I joined
Cleric in Boston. I was then nineteen years old.





BOOK IVâ€”THE PIONEER WOMANâ€™S STORY




I


TWO years after I left Lincoln I completed my academic course at Harvard.
Before I entered the Law School I went home for the summer vacation. On
the night of my arrival Mrs. Harling and Frances and Sally came over to
greet me. Everything seemed just as it used to be. My grandparents looked
very little older. Frances Harling was married now, and she and her
husband managed the Harling interests in Black Hawk. When we gathered in
grandmotherâ€™s parlor, I could hardly believe that I had been away at all.
One subject, however, we avoided all evening.

When I was walking home with Frances, after we had left Mrs. Harling at
her gate, she said simply, â€œYou know, of course, about poor Antonia.â€

Poor Antonia! Every one would be saying that now, I thought bitterly. I
replied that grandmother had written me how Antonia went away to marry
Larry Donovan at some place where he was working; that he had deserted
her, and that there was now a baby. This was all I knew.

â€œHe never married her,â€ Frances said. â€œI have nâ€™t seen her since she came
back. She lives at home, on the farm, and almost never comes to town. She
brought the baby in to show it to mama once. Iâ€™m afraid sheâ€™s settled down
to be Ambroschâ€™s drudge for good.â€

I tried to shut Antonia out of my mind. I was bitterly disappointed in
her. I could not forgive her for becoming an object of pity, while Lena
Lingard, for whom people had always foretold trouble, was now the leading
dressmaker of Lincoln, much respected in Black Hawk. Lena gave her heart
away when she felt like it, but she kept her head for her business and had
got on in the world.

Just then it was the fashion to speak indulgently of Lena and severely of
Tiny Soderball, who had quietly gone West to try her fortune the year
before. A Black Hawk boy, just back from Seattle, brought the news that
Tiny had not gone to the coast on a venture, as she had allowed people to
think, but with very definite plans. One of the roving promoters that used
to stop at Mrs. Gardenerâ€™s hotel owned idle property along the water-front
in Seattle, and he had offered to set Tiny up in business in one of his
empty buildings. She was now conducting a sailorsâ€™ lodging-house. This,
every one said, would be the end of Tiny. Even if she had begun by running
a decent place, she could nâ€™t keep it up; all sailorsâ€™ boarding-houses
were alike.

When I thought about it, I discovered that I had never known Tiny as well
as I knew the other girls. I remembered her tripping briskly about the
dining-room on her high heels, carrying a big tray full of dishes,
glancing rather pertly at the spruce traveling men, and contemptuously at
the scrubby onesâ€”who were so afraid of her that they did nâ€™t dare to ask
for two kinds of pie. Now it occurred to me that perhaps the sailors, too,
might be afraid of Tiny. How astonished we would have been, as we sat
talking about her on Frances Harlingâ€™s front porch, if we could have known
what her future was really to be! Of all the girls and boys who grew up
together in Black Hawk, Tiny Soderball was to lead the most adventurous
life and to achieve the most solid worldly success.

This is what actually happened to Tiny: While she was running her
lodging-house in Seattle, gold was discovered in Alaska. Miners and
sailors came back from the North with wonderful stories and pouches of
gold. Tiny saw it and weighed it in her hands. That daring which nobody
had ever suspected in her, awoke. She sold her business and set out for
Circle City, in company with a carpenter and his wife whom she had
persuaded to go along with her. They reached Skaguay in a snowstorm, went
in dog sledges over the Chilkoot Pass, and shot the Yukon in flatboats.
They reached Circle City on the very day when some Siwash Indians came
into the settlement with the report that there had been a rich gold strike
farther up the river, on a certain Klondike Creek. Two days later Tiny and
her friends, and nearly every one else in Circle City, started for the
Klondike fields on the last steamer that went up the Yukon before it froze
for the winter. That boatload of people founded Dawson City. Within a few
weeks there were fifteen hundred homeless men in camp. Tiny and the
carpenterâ€™s wife began to cook for them, in a tent. The miners gave her a
lot, and the carpenter put up a log hotel for her. There she sometimes fed
a hundred and fifty men a day. Miners came in on snowshoes from their
placer claims twenty miles away to buy fresh bread from her, and paid for
it in gold.

That winter Tiny kept in her hotel a Swede whose legs had been frozen one
night in a storm when he was trying to find his way back to his cabin. The
poor fellow thought it great good fortune to be cared for by a woman, and
a woman who spoke his own tongue. When he was told that his feet must be
amputated, he said he hoped he would not get well; what could a
working-man do in this hard world without feet ? He did, in fact, die from
the operation, but not before he had deeded Tiny Soderball his claim on
Hunker Creek. Tiny sold her hotel, invested half her money in Dawson
building lots, and with the rest she developed her claim. She went off
into the wilds and lived on it. She bought other claims from discouraged
miners, traded or sold them on percentages.

After nearly ten years in the Klondike, Tiny returned, with a considerable
fortune, to live in San Francisco. I met her in Salt Lake City in 1908.
She was a thin, hard-faced woman, very well-dressed, very reserved in
manner. Curiously enough, she reminded me of Mrs. Gardener, for whom she
had worked in Black Hawk so long ago. She told me about some of the
desperate chances she had taken in the gold country, but the thrill of
them was quite gone. She said frankly that nothing interested her much now
but making money. The only two human beings of whom she spoke with any
feeling were the Swede, Johnson, who had given her his claim, and Lena
Lingard. She had persuaded Lena to come to San Francisco and go into
business there.

â€œLincoln was never any place for her,â€ Tiny remarked. â€œIn a town of that
size Lena would always be gossiped about. Friscoâ€™s the right field for
her. She has a fine class of trade. Oh, sheâ€™s just the same as she always
was! Sheâ€™s careless, but sheâ€™s level-headed. Sheâ€™s the only person I know
who never gets any older. Itâ€™s fine for me to have her there; somebody who
enjoys things like that. She keeps an eye on me and wonâ€™t let me be
shabby. When she thinks I need a new dress, she makes it and sends it
homeâ€”with a bill thatâ€™s long enough, I can tell you!â€

Tiny limped slightly when she walked. The claim on Hunker Creek took toll
from its possessors. Tiny had been caught in a sudden turn of weather,
like poor Johnson. She lost three toes from one of those pretty little
feet that used to trip about Black Hawk in pointed slippers and striped
stockings. Tiny mentioned this mutilation quite casuallyâ€”did nâ€™t seem
sensitive about it. She was satisfied with her success, but not elated.
She was like some one in whom the faculty of becoming interested is worn
out.




II


SOON after I got home that summer I persuaded my grandparents to have
their photographs taken, and one morning I went into the photographerâ€™s
shop to arrange for sittings. While I was waiting for him to come out of
his developing-room, I walked about trying to recognize the likenesses on
his walls: girls in Commencement dresses, country brides and grooms
holding hands, family groups of three generations. I noticed, in a heavy
frame, one of those depressing â€œcrayon enlargementsâ€ often seen in
farmhouse parlors, the subject being a round-eyed baby in short dresses.
The photographer came out and gave a constrained, apologetic laugh.

â€œThatâ€™s Tony Shimerdaâ€™s baby. You remember her; she used to be the
Harlingâ€™s Tony. Too bad! She seems proud of the baby, though; would nâ€™t
hear to a cheap frame for the picture. I expect her brother will be in for
it Saturday.â€

I went away feeling that I must see Antonia again. Another girl would have
kept her baby out of sight, but Tony, of course, must have its picture on
exhibition at the town photographerâ€™s, in a great gilt frame. How like
her! I could forgive her, I told myself, if she had nâ€™t thrown herself
away on such a cheap sort of fellow.

Larry Donovan was a passenger conductor, one of those train-crew
aristocrats who are always afraid that some one may ask them to put up a
car-window, and who, if requested to perform such a menial service,
silently point to the button that calls the porter. Larry wore this air of
official aloofness even on the street, where there were no car-windows to
compromise his dignity. At the end of his run he stepped indifferently
from the train along with the passengers, his street hat on his head and
his conductorâ€™s cap in an alligator-skin bag, went directly into the
station and changed his clothes. It was a matter of the utmost importance
to him never to be seen in his blue trousers away from his train. He was
usually cold and distant with men, but with all women he had a silent,
grave familiarity, a special handshake, accompanied by a significant,
deliberate look. He took women, married or single, into his confidence;
walked them up and down in the moonlight, telling them what a mistake he
had made by not entering the office branch of the service, and how much
better fitted he was to fill the post of General Passenger Agent in Denver
than the roughshod man who then bore that title. His unappreciated worth
was the tender secret Larry shared with his sweethearts, and he was always
able to make some foolish heart ache over it.

As I drew near home that morning, I saw Mrs. Harling out in her yard,
digging round her mountain-ash tree. It was a dry summer, and she had now
no boy to help her. Charley was off in his battleship, cruising somewhere
on the Caribbean sea. I turned in at the gateâ€”it was with a feeling of
pleasure that I opened and shut that gate in those days; I liked the feel
of it under my hand. I took the spade away from Mrs. Harling, and while I
loosened the earth around the tree, she sat down on the steps and talked
about the oriole family that had a nest in its branches.

â€œMrs. Harling,â€ I said presently, â€œI wish I could find out exactly how
Antoniaâ€™s marriage fell through.â€

â€œWhy donâ€™t you go out and see your grandfatherâ€™s tenant, the Widow
Steavens ? She knows more about it than anybody else. She helped Antonia
get ready to be married, and she was there when Antonia came back. She
took care of her when the baby was born. She could tell you everything.
Besides, the Widow Steavens is a good talker, and she has a remarkable
memory.â€




III


ON the first or second day of August I got a horse and cart and set out
for the high country, to visit the Widow Steavens. The wheat harvest was
over, and here and there along the horizon I could see black puffs of
smoke from the steam thrashing-machines. The old pasture land was now
being broken up into wheatfields and cornfields, the red grass was
disappearing, and the whole face of the country was changing. There were
wooden houses where the old sod dwellings used to be, and little orchards,
and big red barns; all this meant happy children, contented women, and men
who saw their lives coming to a fortunate issue. The windy springs and the
blazing summers, one after another, had enriched and mellowed that flat
tableland; all the human effort that had gone into it was coming back in
long, sweeping lines of fertility. The changes seemed beautiful and
harmonious to me; it was like watching the growth of a great man or of a
great idea. I recognized every tree and sandbank and rugged draw. I found
that I remembered the conformation of the land as one remembers the
modeling of human faces.

When I drew up to our old windmill, the Widow Steavens came out to meet
me. She was brown as an Indian woman, tall, and very strong. When I was
little, her massive head had always seemed to me like a Roman senatorâ€™s. I
told her at once why I had come.

â€œYouâ€™ll stay the night with us, Jimmy ? Iâ€™ll talk to you after supper. I
can take more interest when my work is off my mind. Youâ€™ve no prejudice
against hot biscuit for supper ? Some have, these days.â€

While I was putting my horse away I heard a rooster squawking. I looked at
my watch and sighed; it was three oâ€™clock, and I knew that I must eat him
at six.

After supper Mrs. Steavens and I went upstairs to the old sitting-room,
while her grave, silent brother remained in the basement to read his farm
papers. All the windows were open. The white summer moon was shining
outside, the windmill was pumping lazily in the light breeze. My hostess
put the lamp on a stand in the corner, and turned it low because of the
heat. She sat down in her favorite rocking-chair and settled a little
stool comfortably under her tired feet. â€œIâ€™m troubled with callouses, Jim;
getting old,â€ she sighed cheerfully. She crossed her hands in her lap and
sat as if she were at a meeting of some kind.

â€œNow, itâ€™s about that dear Antonia you want to know ? Well, youâ€™ve come to
the right person. Iâ€™ve watched her like sheâ€™d been my own daughter.

â€œWhen she came home to do her sewing that summer before she was to be
married, she was over here about every day. Theyâ€™ve never had a sewing
machine at the Shimerdasâ€™, and she made all her things here. I taught her
hemstitching, and I helped her to cut and fit. She used to sit there at
that machine by the window, pedaling the life out of itâ€”she was so
strongâ€”and always singing them queer Bohemian songs, like she was the
happiest thing in the world.

â€œâ€˜Antonia,â€™ I used to say, â€˜donâ€™t run that machine so fast. You wonâ€™t
hasten the day none that way.â€™

â€œThen sheâ€™d laugh and slow down for a little, but sheâ€™d soon forget and
begin to pedal and sing again. I never saw a girl work harder to go to
housekeeping right and well-prepared. Lovely table linen the Harlings had
given her, and Lena Lingard had sent her nice things from Lincoln. We
hemstitched all the tablecloths and pillow-cases, and some of the sheets.
Old Mrs. Shimerda knit yards and yards of lace for her underclothes. Tony
told me just how she meant to have everything in her house. Sheâ€™d even
bought silver spoons and forks, and kept them in her trunk. She was always
coaxing brother to go to the post-office. Her young man did write her real
often, from the different towns along his run.

â€œThe first thing that troubled her was when he wrote that his run had been
changed, and they would likely have to live in Denver. â€˜Iâ€™m a country
girl,â€™ she said, â€˜and I doubt if Iâ€™ll be able to manage so well for him in
a city. I was counting on keeping chickens, and maybe a cow.â€™ She soon
cheered up, though.

â€œAt last she got the letter telling her when to come. She was shaken by
it; she broke the seal and read it in this room. I suspected then that
sheâ€™d begun to get faint-hearted, waiting; though sheâ€™d never let me see
it.

â€œThen there was a great time of packing. It was in March, if I remember
rightly, and a terrible muddy, raw spell, with the roads bad for hauling
her things to town. And here let me say, Ambrosch did the right thing. He
went to Black Hawk and bought her a set of plated silver in a purple
velvet box, good enough for her station. He gave her three hundred dollars
in money; I saw the check. Heâ€™d collected her wages all those first years
she worked out, and it was but right. I shook him by the hand in this
room. â€˜Youâ€™re behaving like a man, Ambrosch,â€™ I said, â€˜and Iâ€™m glad to see
it, son.â€™

â€œâ€™T was a cold, raw day he drove her and her three trunks into Black Hawk
to take the night train for Denverâ€”the boxes had been shipped before. He
stopped the wagon here, and she ran in to tell me good-bye. She threw her
arms around me and kissed me, and thanked me for all Iâ€™d done for her. She
was so happy she was crying and laughing at the same time, and her red
cheeks was all wet with rain.

â€œâ€˜Youâ€™re surely handsome enough for any man,â€™ I said, looking her over.

â€œShe laughed kind of flighty like, and whispered, â€˜Good-bye, dear house!â€™
and then ran out to the wagon. I expect she meant that for you and your
grandmother, as much as for me, so Iâ€™m particular to tell you. This house
had always been a refuge to her.

â€œWell, in a few days we had a letter saying she got to Denver safe, and he
was there to meet her. They were to be married in a few days. He was
trying to get his promotion before he married, she said. I did nâ€™t like
that, but I said nothing. The next week Yulka got a postal card, saying
she was â€˜well and happy.â€™ After that we heard nothing. A month went by,
and old Mrs. Shimerda began to get fretful. Ambrosch was as sulky with me
as if Iâ€™d picked out the man and arranged the match.

â€œOne night brother William came in and said that on his way back from the
fields he had passed a livery team from town, driving fast out the west
road. There was a trunk on the front seat with the driver, and another
behind. In the back seat there was a woman all bundled up; but for all her
veils, he thought â€™t was Antonia Shimerda, or Antonia Donovan, as her name
ought now to be.

â€œThe next morning I got brother to drive me over. I can walk still, but my
feet ainâ€™t what they used to be, and I try to save myself. The lines
outside the Shimerdasâ€™ house was full of washing, though it was the middle
of the week. As we got nearer I saw a sight that made my heart sinkâ€”all
those underclothes weâ€™d put so much work on, out there swinging in the
wind. Yulka came bringing a dishpanful of wrung clothes, but she darted
back into the house like she was loath to see us. When I went in, Antonia
was standing over the tubs, just finishing up a big washing. Mrs. Shimerda
was going about her work, talking and scolding to herself. She did nâ€™t so
much as raise her eyes. Tony wiped her hand on her apron and held it out
to me, looking at me steady but mournful. When I took her in my arms she
drew away. â€˜Donâ€™t, Mrs. Steavens,â€™ she says, â€˜youâ€™ll make me cry, and I
donâ€™t want to.â€™

â€œI whispered and asked her to come out of doors with me. I knew she could
nâ€™t talk free before her mother. She went out with me, bareheaded, and we
walked up toward the garden.

â€œâ€˜Iâ€™m not married, Mrs. Steavens,â€™ she says to me very quiet and
natural-like, â€˜and I ought to be.â€™

â€œâ€˜Oh, my child,â€™ says I, â€˜whatâ€™s happened to you ? Donâ€™t be afraid to tell
me!â€™

â€œShe sat down on the draw-side, out of sight of the house. â€˜Heâ€™s run away
from me,â€™ she said. â€˜I donâ€™t know if he ever meant to marry me.â€™

â€œâ€˜You mean heâ€™s thrown up his job and quit the country ?â€™ says I.

â€œâ€˜He did nâ€™t have any job. Heâ€™d been fired; blacklisted for knocking down
fares. I did nâ€™t know. I thought he had nâ€™t been treated right. He was
sick when I got there. Heâ€™d just come out of the hospital. He lived with
me till my money gave out, and afterwards I found he had nâ€™t really been
hunting work at all. Then he just did nâ€™t come back. One nice fellow at
the station told me, when I kept going to look for him, to give it up. He
said he was afraid Larryâ€™d gone bad and would nâ€™t come back any more. I
guess heâ€™s gone to Old Mexico. The conductors get rich down there,
collecting half-fares off the natives and robbing the company. He was
always talking about fellows who had got ahead that way.â€™

â€œI asked her, of course, why she did nâ€™t insist on a civil marriage at
onceâ€”that would have given her some hold on him. She leaned her head on
her hands, poor child, and said, â€˜I just donâ€™t know, Mrs. Steavens. I
guess my patience was wore out, waiting so long. I thought if he saw how
well I could do for him, heâ€™d want to stay with me.â€™

â€œJimmy, I sat right down on that bank beside her and made lament. I cried
like a young thing. I could nâ€™t help it. I was just about heart-broke. It
was one of them lovely warm May days, and the wind was blowing and the
colts jumping around in the pastures; but I felt bowed with despair. My
Antonia, that had so much good in her, had come home disgraced. And that
Lena Lingard, that was always a bad one, say what you will, had turned out
so well, and was coming home here every summer in her silks and her
satins, and doing so much for her mother. I give credit where credit is
due, but you know well enough, Jim Burden, there is a great difference in
the principles of those two girls. And here it was the good one that had
come to grief! I was poor comfort to her. I marveled at her calm. As we
went back to the house, she stopped to feel of her clothes to see if they
was drying well, and seemed to take pride in their whitenessâ€”she said
sheâ€™d been living in a brick block, where she did nâ€™t have proper
conveniences to wash them.

â€œThe next time I saw Antonia, she was out in the fields ploughing corn.
All that spring and summer she did the work of a man on the farm; it
seemed to be an understood thing. Ambrosch did nâ€™t get any other hand to
help him. Poor Marek had got violent and been sent away to an institution
a good while back. We never even saw any of Tonyâ€™s pretty dresses. She did
nâ€™t take them out of her trunks. She was quiet and steady. Folks respected
her industry and tried to treat her as if nothing had happened. They
talked, to be sure; but not like they would if sheâ€™d put on airs. She was
so crushed and quiet that nobody seemed to want to humble her. She never
went anywhere. All that summer she never once came to see me. At first I
was hurt, but I got to feel that it was because this house reminded her of
too much. I went over there when I could, but the times when she was in
from the fields were the times when I was busiest here. She talked about
the grain and the weather as if sheâ€™d never had another interest, and if I
went over at night she always looked dead weary. She was afflicted with
toothache; one tooth after another ulcerated, and she went about with her
face swollen half the time. She would nâ€™t go to Black Hawk to a dentist
for fear of meeting people she knew. Ambrosch had got over his good spell
long ago, and was always surly. Once I told him he ought not to let
Antonia work so hard and pull herself down. He said, â€˜If you put that in
her head, you better stay home.â€™ And after that I did.

â€œAntonia worked on through harvest and thrashing, though she was too
modest to go out thrashing for the neighbors, like when she was young and
free. I did nâ€™t see much of her until late that fall when she begun to
herd Ambroschâ€™s cattle in the open ground north of here, up toward the big
dog town. Sometimes she used to bring them over the west hill, there, and
I would run to meet her and walk north a piece with her. She had thirty
cattle in her bunch; it had been dry, and the pasture was short, or she
would nâ€™t have brought them so far.

â€œIt was a fine open fall, and she liked to be alone. While the steers
grazed, she used to sit on them grassy banks along the draws and sun
herself for hours. Sometimes I slipped up to visit with her, when she had
nâ€™t gone too far.

â€œâ€˜It does seem like I ought to make lace, or knit like Lena used to,â€™ she
said one day, â€˜but if I start to work, I look around and forget to go on.
It seems such a little while ago when Jim Burden and I was playing all
over this country. Up here I can pick out the very places where my father
used to stand. Sometimes I feel like Iâ€™m not going to live very long, so
Iâ€™m just enjoying every day of this fall.â€™

â€œAfter the winter begun she wore a manâ€™s long overcoat and boots, and a
manâ€™s felt hat with a wide brim. I used to watch her coming and going, and
I could see that her steps were getting heavier. One day in December, the
snow began to fall. Late in the afternoon I saw Antonia driving her cattle
homeward across the hill. The snow was flying round her and she bent to
face it, looking more lonesome-like to me than usual. â€˜Deary me,â€™ I says
to myself, â€˜the girlâ€™s stayed out too late. Itâ€™ll be dark before she gets
them cattle put into the corral.â€™ I seemed to sense sheâ€™d been feeling too
miserable to get up and drive them.

â€œThat very night, it happened. She got her cattle home, turned them into
the corral, and went into the house, into her room behind the kitchen, and
shut the door. There, without calling to anybody, without a groan, she lay
down on the bed and bore her child.

â€œI was lifting supper when old Mrs. Shimerda came running down the
basement stairs, out of breath and screeching:â€”

â€œâ€˜Baby come, baby come!â€™ she says. â€˜Ambrosch much like devil!â€™

â€œBrother William is surely a patient man. He was just ready to sit down to
a hot supper after a long day in the fields. Without a word he rose and
went down to the barn and hooked up his team. He got us over there as
quick as it was humanly possible. I went right in, and began to do for
Antonia; but she laid there with her eyes shut and took no account of me.
The old woman got a tubful of warm water to wash the baby. I overlooked
what she was doing and I said out loud:â€”

â€œâ€˜Mrs. Shimerda, donâ€™t you put that strong yellow soap near that baby.
Youâ€™ll blister its little skin.â€™ I was indignant.

             [Illustration: Antonia driving her cattle home]

â€œâ€˜Mrs. Steavens,â€™ Antonia said from the bed, â€˜if youâ€™ll look in the top
tray of my trunk, youâ€™ll see some fine soap.â€™ That was the first word she
spoke.

â€œAfter Iâ€™d dressed the baby, I took it out to show it to Ambrosch. He was
muttering behind the stove and would nâ€™t look at it.

â€œâ€˜Youâ€™d better put it out in the rain barrel,â€™ he says.

â€œâ€˜Now, see here, Ambrosch,â€™ says I, â€˜thereâ€™s a law in this land, donâ€™t
forget that. I stand here a witness that this baby has come into the world
sound and strong, and I intend to keep an eye on what befalls it.â€™ I pride
myself I cowed him.

â€œWell, I expect youâ€™re not much interested in babies, but Antoniaâ€™s got on
fine. She loved it from the first as dearly as if sheâ€™d had a ring on her
finger, and was never ashamed of it. Itâ€™s a year and eight months old now,
and no baby was ever better cared-for. Antonia is a natural-born mother. I
wish she could marry and raise a family, but I donâ€™t know as thereâ€™s much
chance now.â€



I slept that night in the room I used to have when I was a little boy,
with the summer wind blowing in at the windows, bringing the smell of the
ripe fields. I lay awake and watched the moonlight shining over the barn
and the stacks and the pond, and the windmill making its old dark shadow
against the blue sky.




IV


THE next afternoon I walked over to the Shimerdasâ€™. Yulka showed me the
baby and told me that Antonia was shocking wheat on the southwest quarter.
I went down across the fields, and Tony saw me from a long way off. She
stood still by her shocks, leaning on her pitchfork, watching me as I
came. We met like the people in the old song, in silence, if not in tears.
Her warm hand clasped mine.

â€œI thought youâ€™d come, Jim. I heard you were at Mrs. Steavensâ€™s last
night. Iâ€™ve been looking for you all day.â€

She was thinner than I had ever seen her, and looked, as Mrs. Steavens
said, â€œworked down,â€ but there was a new kind of strength in the gravity
of her face, and her color still gave her that look of deep-seated health
and ardor. Still ? Why, it flashed across me that though so much had
happened in her life and in mine, she was barely twenty-four years old.

Antonia stuck her fork in the ground, and instinctively we walked toward
that unploughed patch at the crossing of the roads as the fittest place to
talk to each other. We sat down outside the sagging wire fence that shut
Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s plot off from the rest of the world. The tall red grass had
never been cut there. It had died down in winter and come up again in the
spring until it was as thick and shrubby as some tropical garden-grass. I
found myself telling her everything: why I had decided to study law and to
go into the law office of one of my motherâ€™s relatives in New York City;
about Gaston Clericâ€™s death from pneumonia last winter, and the difference
it had made in my life. She wanted to know about my friends and my way of
living, and my dearest hopes.

â€œOf course it means you are going away from us for good,â€ she said with a
sigh. â€œBut that donâ€™t mean Iâ€™ll lose you. Look at my papa here; heâ€™s been
dead all these years, and yet he is more real to me than almost anybody
else. He never goes out of my life. I talk to him and consult him all the
time. The older I grow, the better I know him and the more I understand
him.â€

She asked me whether I had learned to like big cities. â€œIâ€™d always be
miserable in a city. Iâ€™d die of lonesomeness. I like to be where I know
every stack and tree, and where all the ground is friendly. I want to live
and die here. Father Kelly says everybodyâ€™s put into this world for
something, and I know what Iâ€™ve got to do. Iâ€™m going to see that my little
girl has a better chance than ever I had. Iâ€™m going to take care of that
girl, Jim.â€

I told her I knew she would. â€œDo you know, Antonia, since Iâ€™ve been away,
I think of you more often than of any one else in this part of the world.
Iâ€™d have liked to have you for a sweetheart, or a wife, or my mother or my
sisterâ€”anything that a woman can be to a man. The idea of you is a part of
my mind; you influence my likes and dislikes, all my tastes, hundreds of
times when I donâ€™t realize it. You really are a part of me.â€

She turned her bright, believing eyes to me, and the tears came up in them
slowly. â€œHow can it be like that, when you know so many people, and when
Iâ€™ve disappointed you so ? Ainâ€™t it wonderful, Jim, how much people can
mean to each other ? Iâ€™m so glad we had each other when we were little. I
canâ€™t wait till my little girlâ€™s old enough to tell her about all the
things we used to do. Youâ€™ll always remember me when you think about old
times, wonâ€™t you ? And I guess everybody thinks about old times, even the
happiest people.â€

As we walked homeward across the fields, the sun dropped and lay like a
great golden globe in the low west. While it hung there, the moon rose in
the east, as big as a cartwheel, pale silver and streaked with rose color,
thin as a bubble or a ghost-moon. For five, perhaps ten minutes, the two
luminaries confronted each other across the level land, resting on
opposite edges of the world. In that singular light every little tree and
shock of wheat, every sunflower stalk and clump of snow-on-the-mountain,
drew itself up high and pointed; the very clods and furrows in the fields
seemed to stand up sharply. I felt the old pull of the earth, the solemn
magic that comes out of those fields at nightfall. I wished I could be a
little boy again, and that my way could end there.

We reached the edge of the field, where our ways parted. I took her hands
and held them against my breast, feeling once more how strong and warm and
good they were, those brown hands, and remembering how many kind things
they had done for me. I held them now a long while, over my heart. About
us it was growing darker and darker, and I had to look hard to see her
face, which I meant always to carry with me; the closest, realest face,
under all the shadows of womenâ€™s faces, at the very bottom of my memory.

â€œIâ€™ll come back,â€ I said earnestly, through the soft, intrusive darkness.

â€œPerhaps you willâ€â€”I felt rather than saw her smile. â€œBut even if you
donâ€™t, youâ€™re here, like my father. So I wonâ€™t be lonesome.â€

As I went back alone over that familiar road, I could almost believe that
a boy and girl ran along beside me, as our shadows used to do, laughing
and whispering to each other in the grass.





BOOK Vâ€”CUZAKâ€™S BOYS




I


I TOLD Antonia I would come back, but life intervened, and it was twenty
years before I kept my promise. I heard of her from time to time; that she
married, very soon after I last saw her, a young Bohemian, a cousin of
Anton Jelinek; that they were poor, and had a large family. Once when I
was abroad I went into Bohemia, and from Prague I sent Antonia some
photographs of her native village. Months afterward came a letter from
her, telling me the names and ages of her many children, but little else;
signed, â€œYour old friend, Antonia Cuzak.â€ When I met Tiny Soderball in
Salt Lake, she told me that Antonia had not â€œdone very wellâ€; that her
husband was not a man of much force, and she had had a hard life. Perhaps
it was cowardice that kept me away so long. My business took me West
several times every year, and it was always in the back of my mind that I
would stop in Nebraska some day and go to see Antonia. But I kept putting
it off until the next trip. I did not want to find her aged and broken; I
really dreaded it. In the course of twenty crowded years one parts with
many illusions. I did not wish to lose the early ones. Some memories are
realities, and are better than anything that can ever happen to one again.

I owe it to Lena Lingard that I went to see Antonia at last. I was in San
Francisco two summers ago when both Lena and Tiny Soderball were in town.
Tiny lives in a house of her own, and Lenaâ€™s shop is in an apartment house
just around the corner. It interested me, after so many years, to see the
two women together. Tiny audits Lenaâ€™s accounts occasionally, and invests
her money for her; and Lena, apparently, takes care that Tiny does nâ€™t
grow too miserly. â€œIf thereâ€™s anything I canâ€™t stand,â€ she said to me in
Tinyâ€™s presence, â€œitâ€™s a shabby rich woman.â€ Tiny smiled grimly and
assured me that Lena would never be either shabby or rich. â€œAnd I donâ€™t
want to be,â€ the other agreed complacently.

Lena gave me a cheerful account of Antonia and urged me to make her a
visit.

â€œYou really ought to go, Jim. It would be such a satisfaction to her.
Never mind what Tiny says. Thereâ€™s nothing the matter with Cuzak. Youâ€™d
like him. He is nâ€™t a hustler, but a rough man would never have suited
Tony. Tony has nice childrenâ€”ten or eleven of them by this time, I guess.
I should nâ€™t care for a family of that size myself, but somehow itâ€™s just
right for Tony. Sheâ€™d love to show them to you.â€

On my way East I broke my journey at Hastings, in Nebraska, and set off
with an open buggy and a fairly good livery team to find the Cuzak farm.
At a little past midday, I knew I must be nearing my destination. Set back
on a swell of land at my right, I saw a wide farmhouse, with a red barn
and an ash grove, and cattle yards in front that sloped down to the high
road. I drew up my horses and was wondering whether I should drive in
here, when I heard low voices. Ahead of me, in a plum thicket beside the
road, I saw two boys bending over a dead dog. The little one, not more
than four or five, was on his knees, his hands folded, and his
close-clipped, bare head drooping forward in deep dejection. The other
stood beside him, a hand on his shoulder, and was comforting him in a
language I had not heard for a long while. When I stopped my horses
opposite them, the older boy took his brother by the hand and came toward
me. He, too, looked grave. This was evidently a sad afternoon for them.

â€œAre you Mrs. Cuzakâ€™s boys ?â€ I asked.

The younger one did not look up; he was submerged in his own feelings, but
his brother met me with intelligent gray eyes. â€œYes, sir.â€

â€œDoes she live up there on the hill ? I am going to see her. Get in and
ride up with me.â€

He glanced at his reluctant little brother. â€œI guess weâ€™d better walk. But
weâ€™ll open the gate for you.â€

I drove along the side-road and they followed slowly behind. When I pulled
up at the windmill, another boy, barefooted and curly-headed, ran out of
the barn to tie my team for me. He was a handsome one, this chap,
fair-skinned and freckled, with red cheeks and a ruddy pelt as thick as a
lambâ€™s wool, growing down on his neck in little tufts. He tied my team
with two flourishes of his hands, and nodded when I asked him if his
mother was at home. As he glanced at me, his face dimpled with a seizure
of irrelevant merriment, and he shot up the windmill tower with a
lightness that struck me as disdainful. I knew he was peering down at me
as I walked toward the house.

Ducks and geese ran quacking across my path. White cats were sunning
themselves among yellow pumpkins on the porch steps. I looked through the
wire screen into a big, light kitchen with a white floor. I saw a long
table, rows of wooden chairs against the wall, and a shining range in one
corner. Two girls were washing dishes at the sink, laughing and
chattering, and a little one, in a short pinafore, sat on a stool playing
with a rag baby. When I asked for their mother, one of the girls dropped
her towel, ran across the floor with noiseless bare feet, and disappeared.
The older one, who wore shoes and stockings, came to the door to admit me.
She was a buxom girl with dark hair and eyes, calm and self-possessed.

â€œWonâ€™t you come in ? Mother will be here in a minute.â€

Before I could sit down in the chair she offered me, the miracle happened;
one of those quiet moments that clutch the heart, and take more courage
than the noisy, excited passages in life. Antonia came in and stood before
me; a stalwart, brown woman, flat-chested, her curly brown hair a little
grizzled. It was a shock, of course. It always is, to meet people after
long years, especially if they have lived as much and as hard as this
woman had. We stood looking at each other. The eyes that peered anxiously
at me wereâ€”simply Antoniaâ€™s eyes. I had seen no others like them since I
looked into them last, though I had looked at so many thousands of human
faces. As I confronted her, the changes grew less apparent to me, her
identity stronger. She was there, in the full vigor of her personality,
battered but not diminished, looking at me, speaking to me in the husky,
breathy voice I remembered so well.

â€œMy husbandâ€™s not at home, sir. Can I do anything ?â€

â€œDonâ€™t you remember me, Antonia ? Have I changed so much ?â€

She frowned into the slanting sunlight that made her brown hair look
redder than it was. Suddenly her eyes widened, her whole face seemed to
grow broader. She caught her breath and put out two hard-worked hands.

â€œWhy, itâ€™s Jim! Anna, Yulka, itâ€™s Jim Burden!â€ She had no sooner caught my
hands than she looked alarmed. â€œWhatâ€™s happened ? Is anybody dead ?â€

I patted her arm. â€œNo. I did nâ€™t come to a funeral this time. I got off
the train at Hastings and drove down to see you and your family.â€

She dropped my hand and began rushing about. â€œAnton, Yulka, Nina, where
are you all ? Run, Anna, and hunt for the boys. Theyâ€™re off looking for
that dog, somewhere. And call Leo. Where is that Leo!â€ She pulled them out
of corners and came bringing them like a mother cat bringing in her
kittens. â€œYou donâ€™t have to go right off, Jim ? My oldest boyâ€™s not here.
Heâ€™s gone with papa to the street fair at Wilber. I wonâ€™t let you go!
Youâ€™ve got to stay and see Rudolph and our papa.â€ She looked at me
imploringly, panting with excitement.

While I reassured her and told her there would be plenty of time, the
barefooted boys from outside were slipping into the kitchen and gathering
about her.

â€œNow, tell me their names, and how old they are.â€

As she told them off in turn, she made several mistakes about ages, and
they roared with laughter. When she came to my light-footed friend of the
windmill, she said, â€œThis is Leo, and heâ€™s old enough to be better than he
is.â€

He ran up to her and butted her playfully with his curly head, like a
little ram, but his voice was quite desperate. â€œYouâ€™ve forgot! You always
forget mine. Itâ€™s mean! Please tell him, mother!â€ He clenched his fists in
vexation and looked up at her impetuously.

She wound her forefinger in his yellow fleece and pulled it, watching him.
â€œWell, how old are you ?â€

â€œIâ€™m twelve,â€ he panted, looking not at me but at her; â€œIâ€™m twelve years
old, and I was born on Easter day!â€

She nodded to me. â€œItâ€™s true. He was an Easter baby.â€

The children all looked at me, as if they expected me to exhibit
astonishment or delight at this information. Clearly, they were proud of
each other, and of being so many. When they had all been introduced, Anna,
the eldest daughter, who had met me at the door, scattered them gently,
and came bringing a white apron which she tied round her motherâ€™s waist.

â€œNow, mother, sit down and talk to Mr. Burden. Weâ€™ll finish the dishes
quietly and not disturb you.â€

Antonia looked about, quite distracted. â€œYes, child, but why donâ€™t we take
him into the parlor, now that weâ€™ve got a nice parlor for company ?â€

The daughter laughed indulgently, and took my hat from me. â€œWell, youâ€™re
here, now, mother, and if you talk here, Yulka and I can listen, too. You
can show him the parlor after while.â€ She smiled at me, and went back to
the dishes, with her sister. The little girl with the rag doll found a
place on the bottom step of an enclosed back stairway, and sat with her
toes curled up, looking out at us expectantly.

â€œSheâ€™s Nina, after Nina Harling,â€ Antonia explained. â€œAinâ€™t her eyes like
Ninaâ€™s ? I declare, Jim, I loved you children almost as much as I love my
own. These children know all about you and Charley and Sally, like as if
theyâ€™d grown up with you. I canâ€™t think of what I want to say, youâ€™ve got
me so stirred up. And then, Iâ€™ve forgot my English so. I donâ€™t often talk
it any more. I tell the children I used to speak real well.â€ She said they
always spoke Bohemian at home. The little ones could not speak English at
allâ€”did nâ€™t learn it until they went to school.

â€œI canâ€™t believe itâ€™s you, sitting here, in my own kitchen. You would nâ€™t
have known me, would you, Jim ? Youâ€™ve kept so young, yourself. But itâ€™s
easier for a man. I canâ€™t see how my Anton looks any older than the day I
married him. His teeth have kept so nice. I have nâ€™t got many left. But I
feel just as young as I used to, and I can do as much work. Oh, we donâ€™t
have to work so hard now! Weâ€™ve got plenty to help us, papa and me. And
how many have you got, Jim ?â€

When I told her I had no children she seemed embarrassed. â€œOh, ainâ€™t that
too bad! Maybe you could take one of my bad ones, now ? That Leo; heâ€™s the
worst of all.â€ She leaned toward me with a smile. â€œAnd I love him the
best,â€ she whispered.

â€œMother!â€ the two girls murmured reproachfully from the dishes.

Antonia threw up her head and laughed. â€œI canâ€™t help it. You know I do.
Maybe itâ€™s because he came on Easter day, I donâ€™t know. And heâ€™s never out
of mischief one minute!â€

I was thinking, as I watched her, how little it matteredâ€”about her teeth,
for instance. I know so many women who have kept all the things that she
had lost, but whose inner glow has faded. Whatever else was gone, Antonia
had not lost the fire of life. Her skin, so brown and hardened, had not
that look of flabbiness, as if the sap beneath it had been secretly drawn
away.

While we were talking, the little boy whom they called Jan came in and sat
down on the step beside Nina, under the hood of the stairway. He wore a
funny long gingham apron, like a smock, over his trousers, and his hair
was clipped so short that his head looked white and naked. He watched us
out of his big, sorrowful gray eyes.

â€œHe wants to tell you about the dog, mother. They found it dead,â€ Anna
said, as she passed us on her way to the cupboard.

Antonia beckoned the boy to her. He stood by her chair, leaning his elbows
on her knees and twisting her apron strings in his slender fingers, while
he told her his story softly in Bohemian, and the tears brimmed over and
hung on his long lashes. His mother listened, spoke soothingly to him, and
in a whisper promised him something that made him give her a quick, teary
smile. He slipped away and whispered his secret to Nina, sitting close to
her and talking behind his hand.

When Anna finished her work and had washed her hands, she came and stood
behind her motherâ€™s chair. â€œWhy donâ€™t we show Mr. Burden our new fruit
cave ?â€ she asked.

We started off across the yard with the children at our heels. The boys
were standing by the windmill, talking about the dog; some of them ran
ahead to open the cellar door. When we descended, they all came down after
us, and seemed quite as proud of the cave as the girls were. Ambrosch, the
thoughtful-looking one who had directed me down by the plum bushes, called
my attention to the stout brick walls and the cement floor. â€œYes, it is a
good way from the house,â€ he admitted. â€œBut, you see, in winter there are
nearly always some of us around to come out and get things.â€

Anna and Yulka showed me three small barrels; one full of dill pickles,
one full of chopped pickles, and one full of pickled watermelon rinds.

â€œYou would nâ€™t believe, Jim, what it takes to feed them all!â€ their mother
exclaimed. â€œYou ought to see the bread we bake on Wednesdays and
Saturdays! Itâ€™s no wonder their poor papa canâ€™t get rich, he has to buy so
much sugar for us to preserve with. We have our own wheat ground for
flour,â€”but then thereâ€™s that much less to sell.â€

Nina and Jan, and a little girl named Lucie, kept shyly pointing out to me
the shelves of glass jars. They said nothing, but glancing at me, traced
on the glass with their finger-tips the outline of the cherries and
strawberries and crab-apples within, trying by a blissful expression of
countenance to give me some idea of their deliciousness.

â€œShow him the spiced plums, mother. Americans donâ€™t have those,â€ said one
of the older boys. â€œMother uses them to make kolaches,â€ he added.

Leo, in a low voice, tossed off some scornful remark in Bohemian.

I turned to him. â€œYou think I donâ€™t know what kolaches are, eh ? Youâ€™re
mistaken, young man. Iâ€™ve eaten your motherâ€™s kolaches long before that
Easter day when you were born.â€

â€œAlways too fresh, Leo,â€ Ambrosch remarked with a shrug.

Leo dived behind his mother and grinned out at me.

We turned to leave the cave; Antonia and I went up the stairs first, and
the children waited. We were standing outside talking, when they all came
running up the steps together, big and little, tow heads and gold heads
and brown, and flashing little naked legs; a veritable explosion of life
out of the dark cave into the sunlight. It made me dizzy for a moment.

The boys escorted us to the front of the house, which I had nâ€™t yet seen;
in farmhouses, somehow, life comes and goes by the back door. The roof was
so steep that the eaves were not much above the forest of tall hollyhocks,
now brown and in seed. Through July, Antonia said, the house was buried in
them; the Bohemians, I remembered, always planted hollyhocks. The front
yard was enclosed by a thorny locust hedge, and at the gate grew two
silvery, moth-like trees of the mimosa family. From here one looked down
over the cattle yards, with their two long ponds, and over a wide stretch
of stubble which they told me was a rye-field in summer.

At some distance behind the house were an ash grove and two orchards; a
cherry orchard, with gooseberry and currant bushes between the rows, and
an apple orchard, sheltered by a high hedge from the hot winds. The older
children turned back when we reached the hedge, but Jan and Nina and Lucie
crept through it by a hole known only to themselves and hid under the
low-branching mulberry bushes.

As we walked through the apple orchard, grown up in tall bluegrass,
Antonia kept stopping to tell me about one tree and another. â€œI love them
as if they were people,â€ she said, rubbing her hand over the bark. â€œThere
was nâ€™t a tree here when we first came. We planted every one, and used to
carry water for them, tooâ€”after weâ€™d been working in the fields all day.
Anton, he was a city man, and he used to get discouraged. But I could nâ€™t
feel so tired that I would nâ€™t fret about these trees when there was a dry
time. They were on my mind like children. Many a night after he was asleep
Iâ€™ve got up and come out and carried water to the poor things. And now,
you see, we have the good of them. My man worked in the orange groves in
Florida, and he knows all about grafting. There ainâ€™t one of our neighbors
has an orchard that bears like ours.â€

In the middle of the orchard we came upon a grape-arbor, with seats built
along the sides and a warped plank table. The three children were waiting
for us there. They looked up at me bashfully and made some request of
their mother.

â€œThey want me to tell you how the teacher has the school picnic here every
year. These donâ€™t go to school yet, so they think itâ€™s all like the
picnic.â€

After I had admired the arbor sufficiently, the youngsters ran away to an
open place where there was a rough jungle of French pinks, and squatted
down among them, crawling about and measuring with a string. â€œJan wants to
bury his dog there,â€ Antonia explained. â€œI had to tell him he could. Heâ€™s
kind of like Nina Harling; you remember how hard she used to take little
things ? He has funny notions, like her.â€

We sat down and watched them. Antonia leaned her elbows on the table.
There was the deepest peace in that orchard. It was surrounded by a triple
enclosure; the wire fence, then the hedge of thorny locusts, then the
mulberry hedge which kept out the hot winds of summer and held fast to the
protecting snows of winter. The hedges were so tall that we could see
nothing but the blue sky above them, neither the barn roof nor the
windmill. The afternoon sun poured down on us through the drying grape
leaves. The orchard seemed full of sun, like a cup, and we could smell the
ripe apples on the trees. The crabs hung on the branches as thick as beads
on a string, purple-red, with a thin silvery glaze over them. Some hens
and ducks had crept through the hedge and were pecking at the fallen
apples. The drakes were handsome fellows, with pinkish gray bodies, their
heads and necks covered with iridescent green feathers which grew close
and full, changing to blue like a peacockâ€™s neck. Antonia said they always
reminded her of soldiersâ€”some uniform she had seen in the old country,
when she was a child.

â€œAre there any quail left now ?â€ I asked. I reminded her how she used to go
hunting with me the last summer before we moved to town. â€œYou were nâ€™t a
bad shot, Tony. Do you remember how you used to want to run away and go
for ducks with Charley Harling and me ?â€

â€œI know, but Iâ€™m afraid to look at a gun now.â€ She picked up one of the
drakes and ruffled his green capote with her fingers. â€œEver since Iâ€™ve had
children, I donâ€™t like to kill anything. It makes me kind of faint to
wring an old gooseâ€™s neck. Ainâ€™t that strange, Jim ?â€

â€œI donâ€™t know. The young Queen of Italy said the same thing once, to a
friend of mine. She used to be a great huntswoman, but now she feels as
you do, and only shoots clay pigeons.â€

â€œThen Iâ€™m sure sheâ€™s a good mother,â€ Antonia said warmly.

She told me how she and her husband had come out to this new country when
the farm land was cheap and could be had on easy payments. The first ten
years were a hard struggle. Her husband knew very little about farming and
often grew discouraged. â€œWeâ€™d never have got through if I had nâ€™t been so
strong. Iâ€™ve always had good health, thank God, and I was able to help him
in the fields until right up to the time before my babies came. Our
children were good about taking care of each other. Martha, the one you
saw when she was a baby, was such a help to me, and she trained Anna to be
just like her. My Marthaâ€™s married now, and has a baby of her own. Think
of that, Jim!

â€œNo, I never got down-hearted. Antonâ€™s a good man, and I loved my children
and always believed they would turn out well. I belong on a farm. Iâ€™m
never lonesome here like I used to be in town. You remember what sad
spells I used to have, when I did nâ€™t know what was the matter with me ?
Iâ€™ve never had them out here. And I donâ€™t mind work a bit, if I donâ€™t have
to put up with sadness.â€ She leaned her chin on her hand and looked down
through the orchard, where the sunlight was growing more and more golden.

â€œYou ought never to have gone to town, Tony,â€ I said, wondering at her.

She turned to me eagerly. â€œOh, Iâ€™m glad I went! Iâ€™d never have known
anything about cooking or housekeeping if I had nâ€™t. I learned nice ways
at the Harlingsâ€™, and Iâ€™ve been able to bring my children up so much
better. Donâ€™t you think they are pretty well-behaved for country children ?
If it had nâ€™t been for what Mrs. Harling taught me, I expect Iâ€™d have
brought them up like wild rabbits. No, Iâ€™m glad I had a chance to learn;
but Iâ€™m thankful none of my daughters will ever have to work out. The
trouble with me was, Jim, I never could believe harm of anybody I loved.â€

While we were talking, Antonia assured me that she could keep me for the
night. â€œWeâ€™ve plenty of room. Two of the boys sleep in the haymow till
cold weather comes, but thereâ€™s no need for it. Leo always begs to sleep
there, and Ambrosch goes along to look after him.â€

I told her I would like to sleep in the haymow, with the boys.

â€œYou can do just as you want to. The chest is full of clean blankets, put
away for winter. Now I must go, or my girls will be doing all the work,
and I want to cook your supper myself.â€

As we went toward the house, we met Ambrosch and Anton, starting off with
their milking-pails to hunt the cows. I joined them, and Leo accompanied
us at some distance, running ahead and starting up at us out of clumps of
ironweed, calling, â€œIâ€™m a jack rabbit,â€ or, â€œIâ€™m a big bull-snake.â€

I walked between the two older boysâ€”straight, well-made fellows, with good
heads and clear eyes. They talked about their school and the new teacher,
told me about the crops and the harvest, and how many steers they would
feed that winter. They were easy and confidential with me, as if I were an
old friend of the familyâ€”and not too old. I felt like a boy in their
company, and all manner of forgotten interests revived in me. It seemed,
after all, so natural to be walking along a barbed-wire fence beside the
sunset, toward a red pond, and to see my shadow moving along at my right,
over the close-cropped grass.

â€œHas mother shown you the pictures you sent her from the old country ?â€
Ambrosch asked. â€œWeâ€™ve had them framed and theyâ€™re hung up in the parlor.
She was so glad to get them. I donâ€™t believe I ever saw her so pleased
about anything.â€ There was a note of simple gratitude in his voice that
made me wish I had given more occasion for it.

I put my hand on his shoulder. â€œYour mother, you know, was very much loved
by all of us. She was a beautiful girl.â€

â€œOh, we know!â€ They both spoke together; seemed a little surprised that I
should think it necessary to mention this. â€œEverybody liked her, did nâ€™t
they ? The Harlings and your grandmother, and all the town people.â€

â€œSometimes,â€ I ventured, â€œit does nâ€™t occur to boys that their mother was
ever young and pretty.â€

â€œOh, we know!â€ they said again, warmly. â€œSheâ€™s not very old now,â€ Ambrosch
added. â€œNot much older than you.â€

â€œWell,â€ I said, â€œif you were nâ€™t nice to her, I think Iâ€™d take a club and
go for the whole lot of you. I could nâ€™t stand it if you boys were
inconsiderate, or thought of her as if she were just somebody who looked
after you. You see I was very much in love with your mother once, and I
know thereâ€™s nobody like her.â€

The boys laughed and seemed pleased and embarrassed. â€œShe never told us
that,â€ said Anton. â€œBut sheâ€™s always talked lots about you, and about what
good times you used to have. She has a picture of you that she cut out of
the Chicago paper once, and Leo says he recognized you when you drove up
to the windmill. You canâ€™t tell about Leo, though; sometimes he likes to
be smart.â€

We brought the cows home to the corner nearest the barn, and the boys
milked them while night came on. Everything was as it should be: the
strong smell of sunflowers and ironweed in the dew, the clear blue and
gold of the sky, the evening star, the purr of the milk into the pails,
the grunts and squeals of the pigs fighting over their supper. I began to
feel the loneliness of the farm-boy at evening, when the chores seem
everlastingly the same, and the world so far away.

What a tableful we were at supper; two long rows of restless heads in the
lamplight, and so many eyes fastened excitedly upon Antonia as she sat at
the head of the table, filling the plates and starting the dishes on their
way. The children were seated according to a system; a little one next an
older one, who was to watch over his behavior and to see that he got his
food. Anna and Yulka left their chairs from time to time to bring fresh
plates of kolaches and pitchers of milk.

After supper we went into the parlor, so that Yulka and Leo could play for
me. Antonia went first, carrying the lamp. There were not nearly chairs
enough to go round, so the younger children sat down on the bare floor.
Little Lucie whispered to me that they were going to have a parlor carpet
if they got ninety cents for their wheat. Leo, with a good deal of
fussing, got out his violin. It was old Mr. Shimerdaâ€™s instrument, which
Antonia had always kept, and it was too big for him. But he played very
well for a self-taught boy. Poor Yulkaâ€™s efforts were not so successful.
While they were playing, little Nina got up from her corner, came out into
the middle of the floor, and began to do a pretty little dance on the
boards with her bare feet. No one paid the least attention to her, and
when she was through she stole back and sat down by her brother.

Antonia spoke to Leo in Bohemian. He frowned and wrinkled up his face. He
seemed to be trying to pout, but his attempt only brought out dimples in
unusual places. After twisting and screwing the keys, he played some
Bohemian airs, without the organ to hold him back, and that went better.
The boy was so restless that I had not had a chance to look at his face
before. My first impression was right; he really was faun-like. He had nâ€™t
much head behind his ears, and his tawny fleece grew down thick to the
back of his neck. His eyes were not frank and wide apart like those of the
other boys, but were deep-set, gold-green in color, and seemed sensitive
to the light. His mother said he got hurt oftener than all the others put
together. He was always trying to ride the colts before they were broken,
teasing the turkey gobbler, seeing just how much red the bull would stand
for, or how sharp the new axe was.

After the concert was over Antonia brought out a big boxful of
photographs; she and Anton in their wedding clothes, holding hands; her
brother Ambrosch and his very fat wife, who had a farm of her own, and who
bossed her husband, I was delighted to hear; the three Bohemian Marys and
their large families.

â€œYou would nâ€™t believe how steady those girls have turned out,â€ Antonia
remarked. â€œMary Svobodaâ€™s the best butter-maker in all this country, and a
fine manager. Her children will have a grand chance.â€

As Antonia turned over the pictures the young Cuzaks stood behind her
chair, looking over her shoulder with interested faces. Nina and Jan,
after trying to see round the taller ones, quietly brought a chair,
climbed up on it, and stood close together, looking. The little boy forgot
his shyness and grinned delightedly when familiar faces came into view. In
the group about Antonia I was conscious of a kind of physical harmony.
They leaned this way and that, and were not afraid to touch each other.
They contemplated the photographs with pleased recognition; looked at some
admiringly, as if these characters in their motherâ€™s girlhood had been
remarkable people. The little children, who could not speak English,
murmured comments to each other in their rich old language.

Antonia held out a photograph of Lena that had come from San Francisco
last Christmas. â€œDoes she still look like that ? She has nâ€™t been home for
six years now.â€ Yes, it was exactly like Lena, I told her; a comely woman,
a trifle too plump, in a hat a trifle too large, but with the old lazy
eyes, and the old dimpled ingenuousness still lurking at the corners of
her mouth.

There was a picture of Frances Harling in a be-frogged riding costume that
I remembered well. â€œIs nâ€™t she fine!â€ the girls murmured. They all
assented. One could see that Frances had come down as a heroine in the
family legend. Only Leo was unmoved.

â€œAnd thereâ€™s Mr. Harling, in his grand fur coat. He was awfully rich, was
nâ€™t he, mother ?â€

â€œHe was nâ€™t any Rockefeller,â€ put in Master Leo, in a very low tone, which
reminded me of the way in which Mrs. Shimerda had once said that my
grandfather â€œwas nâ€™t Jesus.â€ His habitual skepticism was like a direct
inheritance from that old woman.

â€œNone of your smart speeches,â€ said Ambrosch severely.

Leo poked out a supple red tongue at him, but a moment later broke into a
giggle at a tintype of two men, uncomfortably seated, with an
awkward-looking boy in baggy clothes standing between them; Jake and Otto
and I! We had it taken, I remembered, when we went to Black Hawk on the
first Fourth of July I spent in Nebraska. I was glad to see Jakeâ€™s grin
again, and Ottoâ€™s ferocious mustaches. The young Cuzaks knew all about
them.

â€œHe made grandfatherâ€™s coffin, did nâ€™t he ?â€ Anton asked.

â€œWas nâ€™t they good fellows, Jim ?â€ Antoniaâ€™s eyes filled. â€œTo this day Iâ€™m
ashamed because I quarreled with Jake that way. I was saucy and
impertinent to him, Leo, like you are with people sometimes, and I wish
somebody had made me behave.â€

â€œWe are nâ€™t through with you, yet,â€ they warned me. They produced a
photograph taken just before I went away to college; a tall youth in
striped trousers and a straw hat, trying to look easy and jaunty.

â€œTell us, Mr. Burden,â€ said Charley, â€œabout the rattler you killed at the
dog town. How long was he ? Sometimes mother says six feet and sometimes
she says five.â€

These children seemed to be upon very much the same terms with Antonia as
the Harling children had been so many years before. They seemed to feel
the same pride in her, and to look to her for stories and entertainment as
we used to do.

It was eleven oâ€™clock when I at last took my bag and some blankets and
started for the barn with the boys. Their mother came to the door with us,
and we tarried for a moment to look out at the white slope of the corral
and the two ponds asleep in the moonlight, and the long sweep of the
pasture under the star-sprinkled sky.

The boys told me to choose my own place in the haymow, and I lay down
before a big window, left open in warm weather, that looked out into the
stars. Ambrosch and Leo cuddled up in a hay-cave, back under the eaves,
and lay giggling and whispering. They tickled each other and tossed and
tumbled in the hay; and then, all at once, as if they had been shot, they
were still. There was hardly a minute between giggles and bland slumber.

I lay awake for a long while, until the slow-moving moon passed my window
on its way up the heavens. I was thinking about Antonia and her children;
about Annaâ€™s solicitude for her, Ambroschâ€™s grave affection, Leoâ€™s
jealous, animal little love. That moment, when they all came tumbling out
of the cave into the light, was a sight any man might have come far to
see. Antonia had always been one to leave images in the mind that did not
fadeâ€”that grew stronger with time. In my memory there was a succession of
such pictures, fixed there like the old woodcuts of oneâ€™s first primer:
Antonia kicking her bare legs against the sides of my pony when we came
home in triumph with our snake; Antonia in her black shawl and fur cap, as
she stood by her fatherâ€™s grave in the snowstorm; Antonia coming in with
her work-team along the evening sky-line. She lent herself to immemorial
human attitudes which we recognize by instinct as universal and true. I
had not been mistaken. She was a battered woman now, not a lovely girl;
but she still had that something which fires the imagination, could still
stop oneâ€™s breath for a moment by a look or gesture that somehow revealed
the meaning in common things. She had only to stand in the orchard, to put
her hand on a little crab tree and look up at the apples, to make you feel
the goodness of planting and tending and harvesting at last. All the
strong things of her heart came out in her body, that had been so tireless
in serving generous emotions.

It was no wonder that her sons stood tall and straight. She was a rich
mine of life, like the founders of early races.




II


WHEN I awoke in the morning long bands of sunshine were coming in at the
window and reaching back under the eaves where the two boys lay. Leo was
wide awake and was tickling his brotherâ€™s leg with a dried cone-flower he
had pulled out of the hay. Ambrosch kicked at him and turned over. I
closed my eyes and pretended to be asleep. Leo lay on his back, elevated
one foot, and began exercising his toes. He picked up dried flowers with
his toes and brandished them in the belt of sunlight. After he had amused
himself thus for some time, he rose on one elbow and began to look at me,
cautiously, then critically, blinking his eyes in the light. His
expression was droll; it dismissed me lightly. â€œThis old fellow is no
different from other people. He does nâ€™t know my secret.â€ He seemed
conscious of possessing a keener power of enjoyment than other people; his
quick recognitions made him frantically impatient of deliberate judgments.
He always knew what he wanted without thinking.

After dressing in the hay, I washed my face in cold water at the windmill.
Breakfast was ready when I entered the kitchen, and Yulka was baking
griddle-cakes. The three older boys set off for the fields early. Leo and
Yulka were to drive to town to meet their father, who would return from
Wilber on the noon train.

â€œWeâ€™ll only have a lunch at noon,â€ Antonia said, â€œand cook the geese for
supper, when our papa will be here. I wish my Martha could come down to
see you. They have a Ford car now, and she donâ€™t seem so far away from me
as she used to. But her husbandâ€™s crazy about his farm and about having
everything just right, and they almost never get away except on Sundays.
Heâ€™s a handsome boy, and heâ€™ll be rich some day. Everything he takes hold
of turns out well. When they bring that baby in here, and unwrap him, he
looks like a little prince; Martha takes care of him so beautiful. Iâ€™m
reconciled to her being away from me now, but at first I cried like I was
putting her into her coffin.â€

We were alone in the kitchen, except for Anna, who was pouring cream into
the churn. She looked up at me. â€œYes, she did. We were just ashamed of
mother. She went round crying, when Martha was so happy, and the rest of
us were all glad. Joe certainly was patient with you, mother.â€

Antonia nodded and smiled at herself. â€œI know it was silly, but I could
nâ€™t help it. I wanted her right here. Sheâ€™d never been away from me a
night since she was born. If Anton had made trouble about her when she was
a baby, or wanted me to leave her with my mother, I would nâ€™t have married
him. I could nâ€™t. But he always loved her like she was his own.â€

â€œI did nâ€™t even know Martha was nâ€™t my full sister until after she was
engaged to Joe,â€ Anna told me.

Toward the middle of the afternoon the wagon drove in, with the father and
the eldest son. I was smoking in the orchard, and as I went out to meet
them, Antonia came running down from the house and hugged the two men as
if they had been away for months.

â€œPapaâ€ interested me, from my first glimpse of him. He was shorter than
his older sons; a crumpled little man, with run-over boot heels, and he
carried one shoulder higher than the other. But he moved very quickly, and
there was an air of jaunty liveliness about him. He had a strong, ruddy
color, thick black hair, a little grizzled, a curly mustache, and red
lips. His smile showed the strong teeth of which his wife was so proud,
and as he saw me his lively, quizzical eyes told me that he knew all about
me. He looked like a humorous philosopher who had hitched up one shoulder
under the burdens of life, and gone on his way having a good time when he
could. He advanced to meet me and gave me a hard hand, burned red on the
back and heavily coated with hair. He wore his Sunday clothes, very thick
and hot for the weather, an unstarched white shirt, and a blue necktie
with big white dots, like a little boyâ€™s, tied in a flowing bow. Cuzak
began at once to talk about his holidayâ€”from politeness he spoke in
English.

â€œMama, I wish you had see the lady dance on the slack-wire in the street
at night. They throw a bright light on her and she float through the air
something beautiful, like a bird! They have a dancing bear, like in the
old country, and two three merry-go-around, and people in balloons, and
what you call the big wheel, Rudolph ?â€

â€œA Ferris wheel,â€ Rudolph entered the conversation in a deep baritone
voice. He was six foot two, and had a chest like a young blacksmith. â€œWe
went to the big dance in the hall behind the saloon last night, mother,
and I danced with all the girls, and so did father. I never saw so many
pretty girls. It was a Bohunk crowd, for sure. We did nâ€™t hear a word of
English on the street, except from the show people, did we, papa ?â€

Cuzak nodded. â€œAnd very many send word to you, Antonia. You will
excuseâ€â€”turning to meâ€”â€œif I tell her.â€ While we walked toward the house he
related incidents and delivered messages in the tongue he spoke fluently,
and I dropped a little behind, curious to know what their relations had
becomeâ€”or remained. The two seemed to be on terms of easy friendliness,
touched with humor. Clearly, she was the impulse, and he the corrective.
As they went up the hill he kept glancing at her sidewise, to see whether
she got his point, or how she received it. I noticed later that he always
looked at people sidewise, as a work-horse does at its yoke-mate. Even
when he sat opposite me in the kitchen, talking, he would turn his head a
little toward the clock or the stove and look at me from the side, but
with frankness and good-nature. This trick did not suggest duplicity or
secretiveness, but merely long habit, as with the horse.

He had brought a tintype of himself and Rudolph for Antoniaâ€™s collection,
and several paper bags of candy for the children. He looked a little
disappointed when his wife showed him a big box of candy I had got in
Denverâ€”she had nâ€™t let the children touch it the night before. He put his
candy away in the cupboard, â€œfor when she rains,â€ and glanced at the box,
chuckling. â€œI guess you must have hear about how my family ainâ€™t so
small,â€ he said.

Cuzak sat down behind the stove and watched his women-folk and the little
children with equal amusement. He thought they were nice, and he thought
they were funny, evidently. He had been off dancing with the girls and
forgetting that he was an old fellow, and now his family rather surprised
him; he seemed to think it a joke that all these children should belong to
him. As the younger ones slipped up to him in his retreat, he kept taking
things out of his pockets; penny dolls, a wooden clown, a balloon pig that
was inflated by a whistle. He beckoned to the little boy they called Jan,
whispered to him, and presented him with a paper snake, gently, so as not
to startle him. Looking over the boyâ€™s head he said to me, â€œThis one is
bashful. He gets left.â€

Cuzak had brought home with him a roll of illustrated Bohemian papers. He
opened them and began to tell his wife the news, much of which seemed to
relate to one person. I heard the name Vasakova, Vasakova, repeated
several times with lively interest, and presently I asked him whether he
were talking about the singer, Maria Vasak.

â€œYou know ? You have heard, maybe ?â€ he asked incredulously. When I assured
him that I had heard her, he pointed out her picture and told me that
Vasak had broken her leg, climbing in the Austrian Alps, and would not be
able to fill her engagements. He seemed delighted to find that I had heard
her sing in London and in Vienna; got out his pipe and lit it to enjoy our
talk the better. She came from his part of Prague. His father used to mend
her shoes for her when she was a student. Cuzak questioned me about her
looks, her popularity, her voice; but he particularly wanted to know
whether I had noticed her tiny feet, and whether I thought she had saved
much money. She was extravagant, of course, but he hoped she would nâ€™t
squander everything, and have nothing left when she was old. As a young
man, working in Wienn, he had seen a good many artists who were old and
poor, making one glass of beer last all evening, and â€œit was not very
nice, that.â€

When the boys came in from milking and feeding, the long table was laid,
and two brown geese, stuffed with apples, were put down sizzling before
Antonia. She began to carve, and Rudolph, who sat next his mother, started
the plates on their way. When everybody was served, he looked across the
table at me.

â€œHave you been to Black Hawk lately, Mr. Burden ? Then I wonder if youâ€™ve
heard about the Cutters ?â€

No, I had heard nothing at all about them.

â€œThen you must tell him, son, though itâ€™s a terrible thing to talk about
at supper. Now, all you children be quiet, Rudolph is going to tell about
the murder.â€

â€œHurrah! The murder!â€ the children murmured, looking pleased and
interested.

Rudolph told his story in great detail, with occasional promptings from
his mother or father.

Wick Cutter and his wife had gone on living in the house that Antonia and
I knew so well, and in the way we knew so well. They grew to be very old
people. He shriveled up, Antonia said, until he looked like a little old
yellow monkey, for his beard and his fringe of hair never changed color.
Mrs. Cutter remained flushed and wild-eyed as we had known her, but as the
years passed she became afflicted with a shaking palsy which made her
nervous nod continuous instead of occasional. Her hands were so uncertain
that she could no longer disfigure china, poor woman! As the couple grew
older, they quarreled more and more about the ultimate disposition of
their â€œproperty.â€ A new law was passed in the State, securing the
surviving wife a third of her husbandâ€™s estate under all conditions.
Cutter was tormented by the fear that Mrs. Cutter would live longer than
he, and that eventually her â€œpeople,â€ whom he had always hated so
violently, would inherit. Their quarrels on this subject passed the
boundary of the close-growing cedars, and were heard in the street by
whoever wished to loiter and listen.

One morning, two years ago, Cutter went into the hardware store and bought
a pistol, saying he was going to shoot a dog, and adding that he â€œthought
he would take a shot at an old cat while he was about it.â€ (Here the
children interrupted Rudolphâ€™s narrative by smothered giggles.)

Cutter went out behind the hardware store, put up a target, practiced for
an hour or so, and then went home. At six oâ€™clock that evening, when
several men were passing the Cutter house on their way home to supper,
they heard a pistol shot. They paused and were looking doubtfully at one
another, when another shot came crashing through an upstairs window. They
ran into the house and found Wick Cutter lying on a sofa in his upstairs
bedroom, with his throat torn open, bleeding on a roll of sheets he had
placed beside his head.

â€œWalk in, gentlemen,â€ he said weakly. â€œI am alive, you see, and competent.
You are witnesses that I have survived my wife. You will find her in her
own room. Please make your examination at once, so that there will be no
mistake.â€

One of the neighbors telephoned for a doctor, while the others went into
Mrs. Cutterâ€™s room. She was lying on her bed, in her nightgown and
wrapper, shot through the heart. Her husband must have come in while she
was taking her afternoon nap and shot her, holding the revolver near her
breast. Her nightgown was burned from the powder.

The horrified neighbors rushed back to Cutter. He opened his eyes and said
distinctly, â€œMrs. Cutter is quite dead, gentlemen, and I am conscious. My
affairs are in order.â€ Then, Rudolph said, â€œhe let go and died.â€

On his desk the coroner found a letter, dated at five oâ€™clock that
afternoon. It stated that he had just shot his wife; that any will she
might secretly have made would be invalid, as he survived her. He meant to
shoot himself at six oâ€™clock and would, if he had strength, fire a shot
through the window in the hope that passers-by might come in and see him
â€œbefore life was extinct,â€ as he wrote.

â€œNow, would you have thought that man had such a cruel heart ?â€ Antonia
turned to me after the story was told. â€œTo go and do that poor woman out
of any comfort she might have from his money after he was gone!â€

â€œDid you ever hear of anybody else that killed himself for spite, Mr.
Burden ?â€ asked Rudolph.

I admitted that I had nâ€™t. Every lawyer learns over and over how strong a
motive hate can be, but in my collection of legal anecdotes I had nothing
to match this one. When I asked how much the estate amounted to, Rudolph
said it was a little over a hundred thousand dollars.

Cuzak gave me a twinkling, sidelong glance. â€œThe lawyers, they got a good
deal of it, sure,â€ he said merrily.

A hundred thousand dollars; so that was the fortune that had been scraped
together by such hard dealing, and that Cutter himself had died for in the
end!

After supper Cuzak and I took a stroll in the orchard and sat down by the
windmill to smoke. He told me his story as if it were my business to know
it.

His father was a shoemaker, his uncle a furrier, and he, being a younger
son, was apprenticed to the latterâ€™s trade. You never got anywhere working
for your relatives, he said, so when he was a journeyman he went to Vienna
and worked in a big fur shop, earning good money. But a young fellow who
liked a good time did nâ€™t save anything in Vienna; there were too many
pleasant ways of spending every night what heâ€™d made in the day. After
three years there, he came to New York. He was badly advised and went to
work on furs during a strike, when the factories were offering big wages.
The strikers won, and Cuzak was blacklisted. As he had a few hundred
dollars ahead, he decided to go to Florida and raise oranges. He had
always thought he would like to raise oranges! The second year a hard
frost killed his young grove, and he fell ill with malaria. He came to
Nebraska to visit his cousin, Anton Jelinek, and to look about. When he
began to look about, he saw Antonia, and she was exactly the kind of girl
he had always been hunting for. They were married at once, though he had
to borrow money from his cousin to buy the wedding-ring.

â€œIt was a pretty hard job, breaking up this place and making the first
crops grow,â€ he said, pushing back his hat and scratching his grizzled
hair. â€œSometimes I git awful sore on this place and want to quit, but my
wife she always say we better stick it out. The babies come along pretty
fast, so it look like it be hard to move, anyhow. I guess she was right,
all right. We got this place clear now. We pay only twenty dollars an acre
then, and I been offered a hundred. We bought another quarter ten years
ago, and we got it most paid for. We got plenty boys; we can work a lot of
land. Yes, she is a good wife for a poor man. She ainâ€™t always so strict
with me, neither. Sometimes maybe I drink a little too much beer in town,
and when I come home she donâ€™t say nothing. She donâ€™t ask me no questions.
We always get along fine, her and me, like at first. The children donâ€™t
make trouble between us, like sometimes happens.â€ He lit another pipe and
pulled on it contentedly.

I found Cuzak a most companionable fellow. He asked me a great many
questions about my trip through Bohemia, about Vienna and the Ringstrasse
and the theaters.

â€œGee! I like to go back there once, when the boys is big enough to farm
the place. Sometimes when I read the papers from the old country, I pretty
near run away,â€ he confessed with a little laugh. â€œI never did think how I
would be a settled man like this.â€

He was still, as Antonia said, a city man. He liked theaters and lighted
streets and music and a game of dominoes after the dayâ€™s work was over.
His sociability was stronger than his acquisitive instinct. He liked to
live day by day and night by night, sharing in the excitement of the
crowd.â€”Yet his wife had managed to hold him here on a farm, in one of the
loneliest countries in the world.

I could see the little chap, sitting here every evening by the windmill,
nursing his pipe and listening to the silence; the wheeze of the pump, the
grunting of the pigs, an occasional squawking when the hens were disturbed
by a rat. It did rather seem to me that Cuzak had been made the instrument
of Antoniaâ€™s special mission. This was a fine life, certainly, but it was
nâ€™t the kind of life he had wanted to live. I wondered whether the life
that was right for one was ever right for two!

I asked Cuzak if he did nâ€™t find it hard to do without the gay company he
had always been used to. He knocked out his pipe against an upright,
sighed, and dropped it into his pocket.

â€œAt first I near go crazy with lonesomeness,â€ he said frankly, â€œbut my
woman is got such a warm heart. She always make it as good for me as she
could. Now it ainâ€™t so bad; I can begin to have some fun with my boys,
already!â€

As we walked toward the house, Cuzak cocked his hat jauntily over one ear
and looked up at the moon. â€œGee!â€ he said in a hushed voice, as if he had
just wakened up, â€œit donâ€™t seem like I am away from there twenty-six
year!â€




III


AFTER dinner the next day I said good-bye and drove back to Hastings to
take the train for Black Hawk. Antonia and her children gathered round my
buggy before I started, and even the little ones looked up at me with
friendly faces. Leo and Ambrosch ran ahead to open the lane gate. When I
reached the bottom of the hill, I glanced back. The group was still there
by the windmill. Antonia was waving her apron.

At the gate Ambrosch lingered beside my buggy, resting his arm on the
wheel-rim. Leo slipped through the fence and ran off into the pasture.

â€œThatâ€™s like him,â€ his brother said with a shrug. â€œHeâ€™s a crazy kid. Maybe
heâ€™s sorry to have you go, and maybe heâ€™s jealous. Heâ€™s jealous of anybody
mother makes a fuss over, even the priest.â€

I found I hated to leave this boy, with his pleasant voice and his fine
head and eyes. He looked very manly as he stood there without a hat, the
wind rippling his shirt about his brown neck and shoulders.

â€œDonâ€™t forget that you and Rudolph are going hunting with me up on the
Niobrara next summer,â€ I said. â€œYour fatherâ€™s agreed to let you off after
harvest.â€

He smiled. â€œI wonâ€™t likely forget. Iâ€™ve never had such a nice thing
offered to me before. I donâ€™t know what makes you so nice to us boys,â€ he
added, blushing.

â€œOh, yes you do!â€ I said, gathering up my reins.

He made no answer to this, except to smile at me with unabashed pleasure
and affection as I drove away.



My day in Black Hawk was disappointing. Most of my old friends were dead
or had moved away. Strange children, who meant nothing to me, were playing
in the Harlingsâ€™ big yard when I passed; the mountain ash had been cut
down, and only a sprouting stump was left of the tall Lombardy poplar that
used to guard the gate. I hurried on. The rest of the morning I spent with
Anton Jelinek, under a shady cottonwood tree in the yard behind his
saloon. While I was having my mid-day dinner at the hotel, I met one of
the old lawyers who was still in practice, and he took me up to his office
and talked over the Cutter case with me. After that, I scarcely knew how
to put in the time until the night express was due.

I took a long walk north of the town, out into the pastures where the land
was so rough that it had never been ploughed up, and the long red grass of
early times still grew shaggy over the draws and hillocks. Out there I
felt at home again. Overhead the sky was that indescribable blue of
autumn; bright and shadowless, hard as enamel. To the south I could see
the dun-shaded river bluffs that used to look so big to me, and all about
stretched drying cornfields, of the pale-gold color I remembered so well.
Russian thistles were blowing across the uplands and piling against the
wire fences like barricades. Along the cattle paths the plumes of
golden-rod were already fading into sun-warmed velvet, gray with gold
threads in it. I had escaped from the curious depression that hangs over
little towns, and my mind was full of pleasant things; trips I meant to
take with the Cuzak boys, in the Bad Lands and up on the Stinking Water.
There were enough Cuzaks to play with for a long while yet. Even after the
boys grew up, there would always be Cuzak himself! I meant to tramp along
a few miles of lighted streets with Cuzak.

As I wandered over those rough pastures, I had the good luck to stumble
upon a bit of the first road that went from Black Hawk out to the north
country; to my grandfatherâ€™s farm, then on to the Shimerdasâ€™ and to the
Norwegian settlement. Everywhere else it had been ploughed under when the
highways were surveyed; this half-mile or so within the pasture fence was
all that was left of that old road which used to run like a wild thing
across the open prairie, clinging to the high places and circling and
doubling like a rabbit before the hounds. On the level land the tracks had
almost disappearedâ€”were mere shadings in the grass, and a stranger would
not have noticed them. But wherever the road had crossed a draw, it was
easy to find. The rains had made channels of the wheel-ruts and washed
them so deep that the sod had never healed over them. They looked like
gashes torn by a grizzlyâ€™s claws, on the slopes where the farm wagons used
to lurch up out of the hollows with a pull that brought curling muscles on
the smooth hips of the horses. I sat down and watched the haystacks turn
rosy in the slanting sunlight.

This was the road over which Antonia and I came on that night when we got
off the train at Black Hawk and were bedded down in the straw, wondering
children, being taken we knew not whither. I had only to close my eyes to
hear the rumbling of the wagons in the dark, and to be again overcome by
that obliterating strangeness. The feelings of that night were so near
that I could reach out and touch them with my hand. I had the sense of
coming home to myself, and of having found out what a little circle manâ€™s
experience is. For Antonia and for me, this had been the road of Destiny;
had taken us to those early accidents of fortune which predetermined for
us all that we can ever be. Now I understood that the same road was to
bring us together again. Whatever we had missed, we possessed together the
precious, the incommunicable past.

                                 THE END

                              The Wild Land

One January day, thirty years ago, the little town of Hanover,
anchored on a windy Nebraska tableland, was trying not to be blown
away. A mist of fine snowflakes was curling and eddying about the
cluster of low drab buildings huddled on the gray prairie, under
a gray sky. The dwelling-houses were set about haphazard on the
tough prairie sod; some of them looked as if they had been moved in
overnight, and others as if they were straying off by themselves,
headed straight for the open plain. None of them had any appearance
of permanence, and the howling wind blew under them as well as over
them. The main street was a deeply rutted road, now frozen hard,
which ran from the squat red railway station and the grain “elevator”
 at the north end of the town to the lumber yard and the horse pond
at the south end. On either side of this road straggled two uneven
rows of wooden buildings; the general merchandise stores, the two
banks, the drug store, the feed store, the saloon, the post-office.
The board sidewalks were gray with trampled snow, but at two o'clock
in the afternoon the shopkeepers, having come back from dinner,
were keeping well behind their frosty windows. The children were
all in school, and there was nobody abroad in the streets but a
few rough-looking countrymen in coarse overcoats, with their long
caps pulled down to their noses. Some of them had brought their
wives to town, and now and then a red or a plaid shawl flashed out
of one store into the shelter of another. At the hitch-bars along
the street a few heavy work-horses, harnessed to farm wagons,
shivered under their blankets. About the station everything was
quiet, for there would not be another train in until night.

On the sidewalk in front of one of the stores sat a little Swede
boy, crying bitterly. He was about five years old. His black cloth
coat was much too big for him and made him look like a little old
man. His shrunken brown flannel dress had been washed many times
and left a long stretch of stocking between the hem of his skirt
and the tops of his clumsy, copper-toed shoes. His cap was pulled
down over his ears; his nose and his chubby cheeks were chapped and
red with cold. He cried quietly, and the few people who hurried
by did not notice him. He was afraid to stop any one, afraid to
go into the store and ask for help, so he sat wringing his long
sleeves and looking up a telegraph pole beside him, whimpering, “My
kitten, oh, my kitten! Her will fweeze!” At the top of the pole
crouched a shivering gray kitten, mewing faintly and clinging
desperately to the wood with her claws. The boy had been left
at the store while his sister went to the doctor's office, and in
her absence a dog had chased his kitten up the pole. The little
creature had never been so high before, and she was too frightened
to move. Her master was sunk in despair. He was a little country
boy, and this village was to him a very strange and perplexing
place, where people wore fine clothes and had hard hearts. He
always felt shy and awkward here, and wanted to hide behind things
for fear some one might laugh at him. Just now, he was too unhappy
to care who laughed. At last he seemed to see a ray of hope: his
sister was coming, and he got up and ran toward her in his heavy
shoes.

His sister was a tall, strong girl, and she walked rapidly and
resolutely, as if she knew exactly where she was going and what she
was going to do next. She wore a man's long ulster (not as if it
were an affliction, but as if it were very comfortable and belonged
to her; carried it like a young soldier), and a round plush cap,
tied down with a thick veil. She had a serious, thoughtful face,
and her clear, deep blue eyes were fixed intently on the distance,
without seeming to see anything, as if she were in trouble. She
did not notice the little boy until he pulled her by the coat.
Then she stopped short and stooped down to wipe his wet face.

“Why, Emil! I told you to stay in the store and not to come out.
What is the matter with you ?”

“My kitten, sister, my kitten! A man put her out, and a dog chased
her up there.” His forefinger, projecting from the sleeve of his
coat, pointed up to the wretched little creature on the pole.

“Oh, Emil! Didn't I tell you she'd get us into trouble of some
kind, if you brought her ? What made you tease me so ? But there,
I ought to have known better myself.” She went to the foot of the
pole and held out her arms, crying, “Kitty, kitty, kitty,” but the
kitten only mewed and faintly waved its tail. Alexandra turned
away decidedly. “No, she won't come down. Somebody will have to
go up after her. I saw the Linstrums' wagon in town. I'll go and
see if I can find Carl. Maybe he can do something. Only you must
stop crying, or I won't go a step. Where's your comforter ? Did
you leave it in the store ? Never mind. Hold still, till I put
this on you.”

She unwound the brown veil from her head and tied it about his
throat. A shabby little traveling man, who was just then coming out
of the store on his way to the saloon, stopped and gazed stupidly
at the shining mass of hair she bared when she took off her veil;
two thick braids, pinned about her head in the German way, with a
fringe of reddish-yellow curls blowing out from under her cap. He
took his cigar out of his mouth and held the wet end between the
fingers of his woolen glove. “My God, girl, what a head of hair!”
 he exclaimed, quite innocently and foolishly. She stabbed him with
a glance of Amazonian fierceness and drew in her lower lip--most
unnecessary severity. It gave the little clothing drummer such a
start that he actually let his cigar fall to the sidewalk and went
off weakly in the teeth of the wind to the saloon. His hand was
still unsteady when he took his glass from the bartender. His
feeble flirtatious instincts had been crushed before, but never
so mercilessly. He felt cheap and ill-used, as if some one had
taken advantage of him. When a drummer had been knocking about in
little drab towns and crawling across the wintry country in dirty
smoking-cars, was he to be blamed if, when he chanced upon a fine
human creature, he suddenly wished himself more of a man ?

While the little drummer was drinking to recover his nerve, Alexandra
hurried to the drug store as the most likely place to find Carl
Linstrum. There he was, turning over a portfolio of chromo “studies”
 which the druggist sold to the Hanover women who did china-painting.
Alexandra explained her predicament, and the boy followed her to
the corner, where Emil still sat by the pole.

“I'll have to go up after her, Alexandra. I think at the depot
they have some spikes I can strap on my feet. Wait a minute.” Carl
thrust his hands into his pockets, lowered his head, and darted up
the street against the north wind. He was a tall boy of fifteen,
slight and narrow-chested. When he came back with the spikes,
Alexandra asked him what he had done with his overcoat.

“I left it in the drug store. I couldn't climb in it, anyhow.
Catch me if I fall, Emil,” he called back as he began his ascent.
Alexandra watched him anxiously; the cold was bitter enough on the
ground. The kitten would not budge an inch. Carl had to go to
the very top of the pole, and then had some difficulty in tearing
her from her hold. When he reached the ground, he handed the cat
to her tearful little master. “Now go into the store with her,
Emil, and get warm.” He opened the door for the child. “Wait a
minute, Alexandra. Why can't I drive for you as far as our place ?
It's getting colder every minute. Have you seen the doctor ?”

“Yes. He is coming over to-morrow. But he says father can't
get better; can't get well.” The girl's lip trembled. She looked
fixedly up the bleak street as if she were gathering her strength
to face something, as if she were trying with all her might to
grasp a situation which, no matter how painful, must be met and
dealt with somehow. The wind flapped the skirts of her heavy coat
about her.

Carl did not say anything, but she felt his sympathy. He, too, was
lonely. He was a thin, frail boy, with brooding dark eyes, very
quiet in all his movements. There was a delicate pallor in his thin
face, and his mouth was too sensitive for a boy's. The lips had
already a little curl of bitterness and skepticism. The two friends
stood for a few moments on the windy street corner, not speaking
a word, as two travelers, who have lost their way, sometimes stand
and admit their perplexity in silence. When Carl turned away he
said, “I'll see to your team.” Alexandra went into the store to
have her purchases packed in the egg-boxes, and to get warm before
she set out on her long cold drive.

When she looked for Emil, she found him sitting on a step of the
staircase that led up to the clothing and carpet department. He
was playing with a little Bohemian girl, Marie Tovesky, who was
tying her handkerchief over the kitten's head for a bonnet. Marie
was a stranger in the country, having come from Omaha with her mother
to visit her uncle, Joe Tovesky. She was a dark child, with brown
curly hair, like a brunette doll's, a coaxing little red mouth, and
round, yellow-brown eyes. Every one noticed her eyes; the brown
iris had golden glints that made them look like gold-stone, or, in
softer lights, like that Colorado mineral called tiger-eye.

The country children thereabouts wore their dresses to their
shoe-tops, but this city child was dressed in what was then called
the “Kate Greenaway” manner, and her red cashmere frock, gathered
full from the yoke, came almost to the floor. This, with her
poke bonnet, gave her the look of a quaint little woman. She had
a white fur tippet about her neck and made no fussy objections when
Emil fingered it admiringly. Alexandra had not the heart to take
him away from so pretty a playfellow, and she let them tease the
kitten together until Joe Tovesky came in noisily and picked up
his little niece, setting her on his shoulder for every one to see.
His children were all boys, and he adored this little creature.
His cronies formed a circle about him, admiring and teasing the
little girl, who took their jokes with great good nature. They
were all delighted with her, for they seldom saw so pretty and
carefully nurtured a child. They told her that she must choose
one of them for a sweetheart, and each began pressing his suit and
offering her bribes; candy, and little pigs, and spotted calves.
She looked archly into the big, brown, mustached faces, smelling
of spirits and tobacco, then she ran her tiny forefinger delicately
over Joe's bristly chin and said, “Here is my sweetheart.”

The Bohemians roared with laughter, and Marie's uncle hugged her
until she cried, “Please don't, Uncle Joe! You hurt me.” Each
of Joe's friends gave her a bag of candy, and she kissed them all
around, though she did not like country candy very well. Perhaps
that was why she bethought herself of Emil. “Let me down, Uncle
Joe,” she said, “I want to give some of my candy to that nice little
boy I found.” She walked graciously over to Emil, followed by her
lusty admirers, who formed a new circle and teased the little boy
until he hid his face in his sister's skirts, and she had to scold
him for being such a baby.

The farm people were making preparations to start for home. The
women were checking over their groceries and pinning their big red
shawls about their heads. The men were buying tobacco and candy
with what money they had left, were showing each other new boots and
gloves and blue flannel shirts. Three big Bohemians were drinking
raw alcohol, tinctured with oil of cinnamon. This was said to
fortify one effectually against the cold, and they smacked their
lips after each pull at the flask. Their volubility drowned every
other noise in the place, and the overheated store sounded of
their spirited language as it reeked of pipe smoke, damp woolens,
and kerosene.

Carl came in, wearing his overcoat and carrying a wooden box with
a brass handle. “Come,” he said, “I've fed and watered your team,
and the wagon is ready.” He carried Emil out and tucked him down
in the straw in the wagonbox. The heat had made the little boy
sleepy, but he still clung to his kitten.

“You were awful good to climb so high and get my kitten, Carl.
When I get big I'll climb and get little boys' kittens for them,”
 he murmured drowsily. Before the horses were over the first hill,
Emil and his cat were both fast asleep.

Although it was only four o'clock, the winter day was fading. The
road led southwest, toward the streak of pale, watery light that
glimmered in the leaden sky. The light fell upon the two sad young
faces that were turned mutely toward it: upon the eyes of the girl,
who seemed to be looking with such anguished perplexity into the
future; upon the sombre eyes of the boy, who seemed already to be
looking into the past. The little town behind them had vanished as
if it had never been, had fallen behind the swell of the prairie,
and the stern frozen country received them into its bosom. The
homesteads were few and far apart; here and there a windmill gaunt
against the sky, a sod house crouching in a hollow. But the great
fact was the land itself, which seemed to overwhelm the little
beginnings of human society that struggled in its sombre wastes.
It was from facing this vast hardness that the boy's mouth had
become so bitter; because he felt that men were too weak to make
any mark here, that the land wanted to be let alone, to preserve
its own fierce strength, its peculiar, savage kind of beauty, its
uninterrupted mournfulness.

The wagon jolted along over the frozen road. The two friends had
less to say to each other than usual, as if the cold had somehow
penetrated to their hearts.

“Did Lou and Oscar go to the Blue to cut wood to-day ?” Carl asked.

“Yes. I'm almost sorry I let them go, it's turned so cold. But
mother frets if the wood gets low.” She stopped and put her hand
to her forehead, brushing back her hair. “I don't know what is to
become of us, Carl, if father has to die. I don't dare to think
about it. I wish we could all go with him and let the grass grow
back over everything.”

Carl made no reply. Just ahead of them was the Norwegian graveyard,
where the grass had, indeed, grown back over everything, shaggy and
red, hiding even the wire fence. Carl realized that he was not a
very helpful companion, but there was nothing he could say.

“Of course,” Alexandra went on, steadying her voice a little, “the
boys are strong and work hard, but we've always depended so on
father that I don't see how we can go ahead. I almost feel as if
there were nothing to go ahead for.”

“Does your father know ?”

“Yes, I think he does. He lies and counts on his fingers all day.
I think he is trying to count up what he is leaving for us. It's
a comfort to him that my chickens are laying right on through the
cold weather and bringing in a little money. I wish we could keep
his mind off such things, but I don't have much time to be with
him now.”

“I wonder if he'd like to have me bring my magic lantern over some
evening ?”

Alexandra turned her face toward him. “Oh, Carl! Have you got
it ?”

“Yes. It's back there in the straw. Didn't you notice the box
I was carrying ? I tried it all morning in the drug-store cellar,
and it worked ever so well, makes fine big pictures.”

“What are they about ?”

“Oh, hunting pictures in Germany, and Robinson Crusoe and funny
pictures about cannibals. I'm going to paint some slides for it
on glass, out of the Hans Andersen book.”

Alexandra seemed actually cheered. There is often a good deal of
the child left in people who have had to grow up too soon. “Do
bring it over, Carl. I can hardly wait to see it, and I'm sure it
will please father. Are the pictures colored ? Then I know he'll
like them. He likes the calendars I get him in town. I wish I
could get more. You must leave me here, mustn't you ? It's been
nice to have company.”

Carl stopped the horses and looked dubiously up at the black sky.
“It's pretty dark. Of course the horses will take you home, but
I think I'd better light your lantern, in case you should need it.”

He gave her the reins and climbed back into the wagon-box, where
he crouched down and made a tent of his overcoat. After a dozen
trials he succeeded in lighting the lantern, which he placed in
front of Alexandra, half covering it with a blanket so that the
light would not shine in her eyes. “Now, wait until I find my box.
Yes, here it is. Good-night, Alexandra. Try not to worry.” Carl
sprang to the ground and ran off across the fields toward the Linstrum
homestead. “Hoo, hoo-o-o-o!” he called back as he disappeared over
a ridge and dropped into a sand gully. The wind answered him like
an echo, “Hoo, hoo-o-o-o-o-o!” Alexandra drove off alone. The
rattle of her wagon was lost in the howling of the wind, but her
lantern, held firmly between her feet, made a moving point of light
along the highway, going deeper and deeper into the dark country.




II

On one of the ridges of that wintry waste stood the low log house
in which John Bergson was dying. The Bergson homestead was easier
to find than many another, because it overlooked Norway Creek, a
shallow, muddy stream that sometimes flowed, and sometimes stood
still, at the bottom of a winding ravine with steep, shelving sides
overgrown with brush and cottonwoods and dwarf ash. This creek
gave a sort of identity to the farms that bordered upon it. Of all
the bewildering things about a new country, the absence of human
landmarks is one of the most depressing and disheartening. The
houses on the Divide were small and were usually tucked away
in low places; you did not see them until you came directly upon
them. Most of them were built of the sod itself, and were only
the unescapable ground in another form. The roads were but faint
tracks in the grass, and the fields were scarcely noticeable. The
record of the plow was insignificant, like the feeble scratches on
stone left by prehistoric races, so indeterminate that they may,
after all, be only the markings of glaciers, and not a record of
human strivings.

In eleven long years John Bergson had made but little impression
upon the wild land he had come to tame. It was still a wild thing
that had its ugly moods; and no one knew when they were likely to
come, or why. Mischance hung over it. Its Genius was unfriendly
to man. The sick man was feeling this as he lay looking out of
the window, after the doctor had left him, on the day following
Alexandra's trip to town. There it lay outside his door, the same
land, the same lead-colored miles. He knew every ridge and draw
and gully between him and the horizon. To the south, his plowed
fields; to the east, the sod stables, the cattle corral, the
pond,--and then the grass.

Bergson went over in his mind the things that had held him back.
One winter his cattle had perished in a blizzard. The next summer
one of his plow horses broke its leg in a prairiedog hole and had
to be shot. Another summer he lost his hogs from cholera, and
a valuable stallion died from a rattlesnake bite. Time and again
his crops had failed. He had lost two children, boys, that came
between Lou and Emil, and there had been the cost of sickness and
death. Now, when he had at last struggled out of debt, he was
going to die himself. He was only forty-six, and had, of course,
counted upon more time.

Bergson had spent his first five years on the Divide getting into
debt, and the last six getting out. He had paid off his mortgages
and had ended pretty much where he began, with the land. He owned
exactly six hundred and forty acres of what stretched outside his
door; his own original homestead and timber claim, making three
hundred and twenty acres, and the half-section adjoining, the
homestead of a younger brother who had given up the fight, gone
back to Chicago to work in a fancy bakery and distinguish himself
in a Swedish athletic club. So far John had not attempted to
cultivate the second half-section, but used it for pasture land,
and one of his sons rode herd there in open weather.

John Bergson had the Old-World belief that land, in itself, is
desirable. But this land was an enigma. It was like a horse that
no one knows how to break to harness, that runs wild and kicks
things to pieces. He had an idea that no one understood how to
farm it properly, and this he often discussed with Alexandra. Their
neighbors, certainly, knew even less about farming than he did.
Many of them had never worked on a farm until they took up their
homesteads. They had been HANDWERKERS at home; tailors, locksmiths,
joiners, cigar-makers, etc. Bergson himself had worked in a
shipyard.

For weeks, John Bergson had been thinking about these things. His
bed stood in the sitting-room, next to the kitchen. Through the
day, while the baking and washing and ironing were going on, the
father lay and looked up at the roof beams that he himself had
hewn, or out at the cattle in the corral. He counted the cattle
over and over. It diverted him to speculate as to how much weight
each of the steers would probably put on by spring. He often called
his daughter in to talk to her about this. Before Alexandra was
twelve years old she had begun to be a help to him, and as she grew
older he had come to depend more and more upon her resourcefulness
and good judgment. His boys were willing enough to work, but when
he talked with them they usually irritated him. It was Alexandra
who read the papers and followed the markets, and who learned by
the mistakes of their neighbors. It was Alexandra who could always
tell about what it had cost to fatten each steer, and who could
guess the weight of a hog before it went on the scales closer than
John Bergson himself. Lou and Oscar were industrious, but he could
never teach them to use their heads about their work.

Alexandra, her father often said to himself, was like her
grandfather; which was his way of saying that she was intelligent.
John Bergson's father had been a shipbuilder, a man of considerable
force and of some fortune. Late in life he married a second time,
a Stockholm woman of questionable character, much younger than he,
who goaded him into every sort of extravagance. On the shipbuilder's
part, this marriage was an infatuation, the despairing folly of
a powerful man who cannot bear to grow old. In a few years his
unprincipled wife warped the probity of a lifetime. He speculated,
lost his own fortune and funds entrusted to him by poor seafaring
men, and died disgraced, leaving his children nothing. But when all
was said, he had come up from the sea himself, had built up a proud
little business with no capital but his own skill and foresight, and
had proved himself a man. In his daughter, John Bergson recognized
the strength of will, and the simple direct way of thinking things
out, that had characterized his father in his better days. He
would much rather, of course, have seen this likeness in one of
his sons, but it was not a question of choice. As he lay there
day after day he had to accept the situation as it was, and to be
thankful that there was one among his children to whom he could
entrust the future of his family and the possibilities of his
hard-won land.

The winter twilight was fading. The sick man heard his wife strike
a match in the kitchen, and the light of a lamp glimmered through
the cracks of the door. It seemed like a light shining far away.
He turned painfully in his bed and looked at his white hands, with
all the work gone out of them. He was ready to give up, he felt.
He did not know how it had come about, but he was quite willing to
go deep under his fields and rest, where the plow could not find
him. He was tired of making mistakes. He was content to leave the
tangle to other hands; he thought of his Alexandra's strong ones.

“DOTTER,” he called feebly, “DOTTER!” He heard her quick step and
saw her tall figure appear in the doorway, with the light of the
lamp behind her. He felt her youth and strength, how easily she
moved and stooped and lifted. But he would not have had it again
if he could, not he! He knew the end too well to wish to begin
again. He knew where it all went to, what it all became.

His daughter came and lifted him up on his pillows. She called
him by an old Swedish name that she used to call him when she was
little and took his dinner to him in the shipyard.

“Tell the boys to come here, daughter. I want to speak to them.”

“They are feeding the horses, father. They have just come back
from the Blue. Shall I call them ?”

He sighed. “No, no. Wait until they come in. Alexandra, you will
have to do the best you can for your brothers. Everything will
come on you.”

“I will do all I can, father.”

“Don't let them get discouraged and go off like Uncle Otto. I want
them to keep the land.”

“We will, father. We will never lose the land.”

There was a sound of heavy feet in the kitchen. Alexandra went
to the door and beckoned to her brothers, two strapping boys of
seventeen and nineteen. They came in and stood at the foot of the
bed. Their father looked at them searchingly, though it was too
dark to see their faces; they were just the same boys, he told
himself, he had not been mistaken in them. The square head and
heavy shoulders belonged to Oscar, the elder. The younger boy was
quicker, but vacillating.

“Boys,” said the father wearily, “I want you to keep the land
together and to be guided by your sister. I have talked to her
since I have been sick, and she knows all my wishes. I want no
quarrels among my children, and so long as there is one house there
must be one head. Alexandra is the oldest, and she knows my wishes.
She will do the best she can. If she makes mistakes, she will not
make so many as I have made. When you marry, and want a house of
your own, the land will be divided fairly, according to the courts.
But for the next few years you will have it hard, and you must all
keep together. Alexandra will manage the best she can.”

Oscar, who was usually the last to speak, replied because he
was the older, “Yes, father. It would be so anyway, without your
speaking. We will all work the place together.”

“And you will be guided by your sister, boys, and be good brothers
to her, and good sons to your mother ? That is good. And Alexandra
must not work in the fields any more. There is no necessity now.
Hire a man when you need help. She can make much more with her
eggs and butter than the wages of a man. It was one of my mistakes
that I did not find that out sooner. Try to break a little more
land every year; sod corn is good for fodder. Keep turning the
land, and always put up more hay than you need. Don't grudge your
mother a little time for plowing her garden and setting out fruit
trees, even if it comes in a busy season. She has been a good
mother to you, and she has always missed the old country.”

When they went back to the kitchen the boys sat down silently at
the table. Throughout the meal they looked down at their plates
and did not lift their red eyes. They did not eat much, although
they had been working in the cold all day, and there was a rabbit
stewed in gravy for supper, and prune pies.

John Bergson had married beneath him, but he had married a good
housewife. Mrs. Bergson was a fair-skinned, corpulent woman, heavy
and placid like her son, Oscar, but there was something comfortable
about her; perhaps it was her own love of comfort. For eleven years
she had worthily striven to maintain some semblance of household
order amid conditions that made order very difficult. Habit
was very strong with Mrs. Bergson, and her unremitting efforts to
repeat the routine of her old life among new surroundings had done
a great deal to keep the family from disintegrating morally and
getting careless in their ways. The Bergsons had a log house, for
instance, only because Mrs. Bergson would not live in a sod house.
She missed the fish diet of her own country, and twice every summer
she sent the boys to the river, twenty miles to the southward, to
fish for channel cat. When the children were little she used to
load them all into the wagon, the baby in its crib, and go fishing
herself.

Alexandra often said that if her mother were cast upon a desert
island, she would thank God for her deliverance, make a garden,
and find something to preserve. Preserving was almost a mania with
Mrs. Bergson. Stout as she was, she roamed the scrubby banks of
Norway Creek looking for fox grapes and goose plums, like a wild
creature in search of prey. She made a yellow jam of the insipid
ground-cherries that grew on the prairie, flavoring it with lemon
peel; and she made a sticky dark conserve of garden tomatoes. She
had experimented even with the rank buffalo-pea, and she could
not see a fine bronze cluster of them without shaking her head and
murmuring, “What a pity!” When there was nothing more to preserve,
she began to pickle. The amount of sugar she used in these processes
was sometimes a serious drain upon the family resources. She was
a good mother, but she was glad when her children were old enough
not to be in her way in the kitchen. She had never quite forgiven
John Bergson for bringing her to the end of the earth; but, now
that she was there, she wanted to be let alone to reconstruct her
old life in so far as that was possible. She could still take some
comfort in the world if she had bacon in the cave, glass jars on
the shelves, and sheets in the press. She disapproved of all her
neighbors because of their slovenly housekeeping, and the women
thought her very proud. Once when Mrs. Bergson, on her way to
Norway Creek, stopped to see old Mrs. Lee, the old woman hid in
the haymow “for fear Mis' Bergson would catch her barefoot.”




III

One Sunday afternoon in July, six months after John Bergson's death,
Carl was sitting in the doorway of the Linstrum kitchen, dreaming
over an illustrated paper, when he heard the rattle of a wagon along
the hill road. Looking up he recognized the Bergsons' team, with
two seats in the wagon, which meant they were off for a pleasure
excursion. Oscar and Lou, on the front seat, wore their cloth hats
and coats, never worn except on Sundays, and Emil, on the second
seat with Alexandra, sat proudly in his new trousers, made from a
pair of his father's, and a pink-striped shirt, with a wide ruffled
collar. Oscar stopped the horses and waved to Carl, who caught up
his hat and ran through the melon patch to join them.

“Want to go with us ?” Lou called. “We're going to Crazy Ivar's to
buy a hammock.”

“Sure.” Carl ran up panting, and clambering over the wheel sat
down beside Emil. “I've always wanted to see Ivar's pond. They
say it's the biggest in all the country. Aren't you afraid to go
to Ivar's in that new shirt, Emil ? He might want it and take it
right off your back.”

Emil grinned. “I'd be awful scared to go,” he admitted, “if you
big boys weren't along to take care of me. Did you ever hear him
howl, Carl ? People say sometimes he runs about the country howling
at night because he is afraid the Lord will destroy him. Mother
thinks he must have done something awful wicked.”

Lou looked back and winked at Carl. “What would you do, Emil, if
you was out on the prairie by yourself and seen him coming ?”

Emil stared. “Maybe I could hide in a badger-hole,” he suggested
doubtfully.

“But suppose there wasn't any badger-hole,” Lou persisted. “Would
you run ?”

“No, I'd be too scared to run,” Emil admitted mournfully, twisting
his fingers. “I guess I'd sit right down on the ground and say my
prayers.”

The big boys laughed, and Oscar brandished his whip over the broad
backs of the horses.

“He wouldn't hurt you, Emil,” said Carl persuasively. “He came
to doctor our mare when she ate green corn and swelled up most as
big as the water-tank. He petted her just like you do your cats.
I couldn't understand much he said, for he don't talk any English,
but he kept patting her and groaning as if he had the pain himself,
and saying, 'There now, sister, that's easier, that's better!'”

Lou and Oscar laughed, and Emil giggled delightedly and looked up
at his sister.

“I don't think he knows anything at all about doctoring,” said
Oscar scornfully. “They say when horses have distemper he takes
the medicine himself, and then prays over the horses.”

Alexandra spoke up. “That's what the Crows said, but he cured
their horses, all the same. Some days his mind is cloudy, like.
But if you can get him on a clear day, you can learn a great deal
from him. He understands animals. Didn't I see him take the horn
off the Berquist's cow when she had torn it loose and went crazy ?
She was tearing all over the place, knocking herself against things.
And at last she ran out on the roof of the old dugout and her legs
went through and there she stuck, bellowing. Ivar came running
with his white bag, and the moment he got to her she was quiet and
let him saw her horn off and daub the place with tar.”

Emil had been watching his sister, his face reflecting the sufferings
of the cow. “And then didn't it hurt her any more ?” he asked.

Alexandra patted him. “No, not any more. And in two days they
could use her milk again.”

The road to Ivar's homestead was a very poor one. He had settled
in the rough country across the county line, where no one lived but
some Russians,--half a dozen families who dwelt together in one long
house, divided off like barracks. Ivar had explained his choice
by saying that the fewer neighbors he had, the fewer temptations.
Nevertheless, when one considered that his chief business was
horse-doctoring, it seemed rather short-sighted of him to live in the
most inaccessible place he could find. The Bergson wagon lurched
along over the rough hummocks and grass banks, followed the bottom
of winding draws, or skirted the margin of wide lagoons, where the
golden coreopsis grew up out of the clear water and the wild ducks
rose with a whirr of wings.

Lou looked after them helplessly. “I wish I'd brought my gun,
anyway, Alexandra,” he said fretfully. “I could have hidden it
under the straw in the bottom of the wagon.”

“Then we'd have had to lie to Ivar. Besides, they say he can smell
dead birds. And if he knew, we wouldn't get anything out of him,
not even a hammock. I want to talk to him, and he won't talk sense
if he's angry. It makes him foolish.”

Lou sniffed. “Whoever heard of him talking sense, anyhow! I'd
rather have ducks for supper than Crazy Ivar's tongue.”

Emil was alarmed. “Oh, but, Lou, you don't want to make him mad!
He might howl!”

They all laughed again, and Oscar urged the horses up the crumbling
side of a clay bank. They had left the lagoons and the red grass
behind them. In Crazy Ivar's country the grass was short and gray,
the draws deeper than they were in the Bergsons' neighborhood,
and the land was all broken up into hillocks and clay ridges. The
wild flowers disappeared, and only in the bottom of the draws and
gullies grew a few of the very toughest and hardiest: shoestring,
and ironweed, and snow-on-the-mountain.

“Look, look, Emil, there's Ivar's big pond!” Alexandra pointed to
a shining sheet of water that lay at the bottom of a shallow draw.
At one end of the pond was an earthen dam, planted with green willow
bushes, and above it a door and a single window were set into the
hillside. You would not have seen them at all but for the reflection
of the sunlight upon the four panes of window-glass. And that was
all you saw. Not a shed, not a corral, not a well, not even a path
broken in the curly grass. But for the piece of rusty stovepipe
sticking up through the sod, you could have walked over the roof
of Ivar's dwelling without dreaming that you were near a human
habitation. Ivar had lived for three years in the clay bank,
without defiling the face of nature any more than the coyote that
had lived there before him had done.

When the Bergsons drove over the hill, Ivar was sitting in the
doorway of his house, reading the Norwegian Bible. He was a queerly
shaped old man, with a thick, powerful body set on short bow-legs.
His shaggy white hair, falling in a thick mane about his ruddy
cheeks, made him look older than he was. He was barefoot, but
he wore a clean shirt of unbleached cotton, open at the neck. He
always put on a clean shirt when Sunday morning came round, though
he never went to church. He had a peculiar religion of his own
and could not get on with any of the denominations. Often he did
not see anybody from one week's end to another. He kept a calendar,
and every morning he checked off a day, so that he was never in
any doubt as to which day of the week it was. Ivar hired himself
out in threshing and corn-husking time, and he doctored sick animals
when he was sent for. When he was at home, he made hammocks out
of twine and committed chapters of the Bible to memory.

Ivar found contentment in the solitude he had sought out for himself.
He disliked the litter of human dwellings: the broken food, the
bits of broken china, the old wash-boilers and tea-kettles thrown
into the sunflower patch. He preferred the cleanness and tidiness of
the wild sod. He always said that the badgers had cleaner houses
than people, and that when he took a housekeeper her name would
be Mrs. Badger. He best expressed his preference for his wild
homestead by saying that his Bible seemed truer to him there. If
one stood in the doorway of his cave, and looked off at the rough
land, the smiling sky, the curly grass white in the hot sunlight;
if one listened to the rapturous song of the lark, the drumming of
the quail, the burr of the locust against that vast silence, one
understood what Ivar meant.

On this Sunday afternoon his face shone with happiness. He closed
the book on his knee, keeping the place with his horny finger, and
repeated softly:--

  He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills;

  They give drink to every beast of the field; the wild asses quench
  their thirst.

  The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon which
  he hath planted;

  Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees
  are her house.

  The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for
  the conies.

Before he opened his Bible again, Ivar heard the Bergsons' wagon
approaching, and he sprang up and ran toward it.

“No guns, no guns!” he shouted, waving his arms distractedly.

“No, Ivar, no guns,” Alexandra called reassuringly.

He dropped his arms and went up to the wagon, smiling amiably and
looking at them out of his pale blue eyes.

“We want to buy a hammock, if you have one,” Alexandra explained,
“and my little brother, here, wants to see your big pond, where so
many birds come.”

Ivar smiled foolishly, and began rubbing the horses' noses and
feeling about their mouths behind the bits. “Not many birds just
now. A few ducks this morning; and some snipe come to drink. But
there was a crane last week. She spent one night and came back the
next evening. I don't know why. It is not her season, of course.
Many of them go over in the fall. Then the pond is full of strange
voices every night.”

Alexandra translated for Carl, who looked thoughtful. “Ask him,
Alexandra, if it is true that a sea gull came here once. I have
heard so.”

She had some difficulty in making the old man understand.

He looked puzzled at first, then smote his hands together as he
remembered. “Oh, yes, yes! A big white bird with long wings and
pink feet. My! what a voice she had! She came in the afternoon
and kept flying about the pond and screaming until dark. She was
in trouble of some sort, but I could not understand her. She was
going over to the other ocean, maybe, and did not know how far it
was. She was afraid of never getting there. She was more mournful
than our birds here; she cried in the night. She saw the light
from my window and darted up to it. Maybe she thought my house
was a boat, she was such a wild thing. Next morning, when the sun
rose, I went out to take her food, but she flew up into the sky
and went on her way.” Ivar ran his fingers through his thick hair.
“I have many strange birds stop with me here. They come from very
far away and are great company. I hope you boys never shoot wild
birds ?”

Lou and Oscar grinned, and Ivar shook his bushy head. “Yes, I know
boys are thoughtless. But these wild things are God's birds. He
watches over them and counts them, as we do our cattle; Christ says
so in the New Testament.”

“Now, Ivar,” Lou asked, “may we water our horses at your pond and
give them some feed ? It's a bad road to your place.”

“Yes, yes, it is.” The old man scrambled about and began to loose
the tugs. “A bad road, eh, girls ? And the bay with a colt at
home!”

Oscar brushed the old man aside. “We'll take care of the horses,
Ivar. You'll be finding some disease on them. Alexandra wants to
see your hammocks.”

Ivar led Alexandra and Emil to his little cave house. He had but
one room, neatly plastered and whitewashed, and there was a wooden
floor. There was a kitchen stove, a table covered with oilcloth,
two chairs, a clock, a calendar, a few books on the window-shelf;
nothing more. But the place was as clean as a cupboard.

“But where do you sleep, Ivar ?” Emil asked, looking about.

Ivar unslung a hammock from a hook on the wall; in it was rolled
a buffalo robe. “There, my son. A hammock is a good bed, and in
winter I wrap up in this skin. Where I go to work, the beds are
not half so easy as this.”

By this time Emil had lost all his timidity. He thought a cave a
very superior kind of house. There was something pleasantly unusual
about it and about Ivar. “Do the birds know you will be kind to
them, Ivar ? Is that why so many come ?” he asked.

Ivar sat down on the floor and tucked his feet under him. “See,
little brother, they have come from a long way, and they are very
tired. From up there where they are flying, our country looks dark
and flat. They must have water to drink and to bathe in before
they can go on with their journey. They look this way and that,
and far below them they see something shining, like a piece of glass
set in the dark earth. That is my pond. They come to it and are
not disturbed. Maybe I sprinkle a little corn. They tell the other
birds, and next year more come this way. They have their roads up
there, as we have down here.”

Emil rubbed his knees thoughtfully. “And is that true, Ivar, about
the head ducks falling back when they are tired, and the hind ones
taking their place ?”

“Yes. The point of the wedge gets the worst of it; they cut the
wind. They can only stand it there a little while--half an hour,
maybe. Then they fall back and the wedge splits a little, while
the rear ones come up the middle to the front. Then it closes up
and they fly on, with a new edge. They are always changing like
that, up in the air. Never any confusion; just like soldiers who
have been drilled.”

Alexandra had selected her hammock by the time the boys came up
from the pond. They would not come in, but sat in the shade of
the bank outside while Alexandra and Ivar talked about the birds
and about his housekeeping, and why he never ate meat, fresh or
salt.

Alexandra was sitting on one of the wooden chairs, her arms resting
on the table. Ivar was sitting on the floor at her feet. “Ivar,”
 she said suddenly, beginning to trace the pattern on the oilcloth
with her forefinger, “I came to-day more because I wanted to talk
to you than because I wanted to buy a hammock.”

“Yes ?” The old man scraped his bare feet on the plank floor.

“We have a big bunch of hogs, Ivar. I wouldn't sell in the spring,
when everybody advised me to, and now so many people are losing
their hogs that I am frightened. What can be done ?”

Ivar's little eyes began to shine. They lost their vagueness.

“You feed them swill and such stuff ? Of course! And sour milk ?
Oh, yes! And keep them in a stinking pen ? I tell you, sister,
the hogs of this country are put upon! They become unclean, like
the hogs in the Bible. If you kept your chickens like that, what
would happen ? You have a little sorghum patch, maybe ? Put a fence
around it, and turn the hogs in. Build a shed to give them shade,
a thatch on poles. Let the boys haul water to them in barrels,
clean water, and plenty. Get them off the old stinking ground, and
do not let them go back there until winter. Give them only grain
and clean feed, such as you would give horses or cattle. Hogs do
not like to be filthy.”

The boys outside the door had been listening. Lou nudged his
brother. “Come, the horses are done eating. Let's hitch up and
get out of here. He'll fill her full of notions. She'll be for
having the pigs sleep with us, next.”

Oscar grunted and got up. Carl, who could not understand what Ivar
said, saw that the two boys were displeased. They did not mind
hard work, but they hated experiments and could never see the use
of taking pains. Even Lou, who was more elastic than his older
brother, disliked to do anything different from their neighbors.
He felt that it made them conspicuous and gave people a chance to
talk about them.

Once they were on the homeward road, the boys forgot their ill-humor
and joked about Ivar and his birds. Alexandra did not propose any
reforms in the care of the pigs, and they hoped she had forgotten
Ivar's talk. They agreed that he was crazier than ever, and would
never be able to prove up on his land because he worked it so little.
Alexandra privately resolved that she would have a talk with Ivar
about this and stir him up. The boys persuaded Carl to stay for
supper and go swimming in the pasture pond after dark.

That evening, after she had washed the supper dishes, Alexandra
sat down on the kitchen doorstep, while her mother was mixing the
bread. It was a still, deep-breathing summer night, full of the
smell of the hay fields. Sounds of laughter and splashing came
up from the pasture, and when the moon rose rapidly above the bare
rim of the prairie, the pond glittered like polished metal, and
she could see the flash of white bodies as the boys ran about the
edge, or jumped into the water. Alexandra watched the shimmering
pool dreamily, but eventually her eyes went back to the sorghum
patch south of the barn, where she was planning to make her new
pig corral.




IV

For the first three years after John Bergson's death, the affairs
of his family prospered. Then came the hard times that brought
every one on the Divide to the brink of despair; three years of
drouth and failure, the last struggle of a wild soil against the
encroaching plowshare. The first of these fruitless summers the
Bergson boys bore courageously. The failure of the corn crop made
labor cheap. Lou and Oscar hired two men and put in bigger crops
than ever before. They lost everything they spent. The whole
country was discouraged. Farmers who were already in debt had to
give up their land. A few foreclosures demoralized the county.
The settlers sat about on the wooden sidewalks in the little town
and told each other that the country was never meant for men to live
in; the thing to do was to get back to Iowa, to Illinois, to any
place that had been proved habitable. The Bergson boys, certainly,
would have been happier with their uncle Otto, in the bakery shop
in Chicago. Like most of their neighbors, they were meant to follow
in paths already marked out for them, not to break trails in a new
country. A steady job, a few holidays, nothing to think about, and
they would have been very happy. It was no fault of theirs that
they had been dragged into the wilderness when they were little
boys. A pioneer should have imagination, should be able to enjoy
the idea of things more than the things themselves.

The second of these barren summers was passing. One September
afternoon Alexandra had gone over to the garden across the draw to
dig sweet potatoes--they had been thriving upon the weather that
was fatal to everything else. But when Carl Linstrum came up the
garden rows to find her, she was not working. She was standing
lost in thought, leaning upon her pitchfork, her sunbonnet lying
beside her on the ground. The dry garden patch smelled of drying
vines and was strewn with yellow seed-cucumbers and pumpkins and
citrons. At one end, next the rhubarb, grew feathery asparagus,
with red berries. Down the middle of the garden was a row of
gooseberry and currant bushes. A few tough zenias and marigolds
and a row of scarlet sage bore witness to the buckets of water
that Mrs. Bergson had carried there after sundown, against the
prohibition of her sons. Carl came quietly and slowly up the garden
path, looking intently at Alexandra. She did not hear him. She was
standing perfectly still, with that serious ease so characteristic
of her. Her thick, reddish braids, twisted about her head, fairly
burned in the sunlight. The air was cool enough to make the warm
sun pleasant on one's back and shoulders, and so clear that the
eye could follow a hawk up and up, into the blazing blue depths of
the sky. Even Carl, never a very cheerful boy, and considerably
darkened by these last two bitter years, loved the country on days
like this, felt something strong and young and wild come out of
it, that laughed at care.

“Alexandra,” he said as he approached her, “I want to talk to you.
Let's sit down by the gooseberry bushes.” He picked up her sack
of potatoes and they crossed the garden. “Boys gone to town ?” he
asked as he sank down on the warm, sun-baked earth. “Well, we have
made up our minds at last, Alexandra. We are really going away.”

She looked at him as if she were a little frightened. “Really,
Carl ? Is it settled ?”

“Yes, father has heard from St. Louis, and they will give him back
his old job in the cigar factory. He must be there by the first
of November. They are taking on new men then. We will sell the
place for whatever we can get, and auction the stock. We haven't
enough to ship. I am going to learn engraving with a German engraver
there, and then try to get work in Chicago.”

Alexandra's hands dropped in her lap. Her eyes became dreamy and
filled with tears.

Carl's sensitive lower lip trembled. He scratched in the soft earth
beside him with a stick. “That's all I hate about it, Alexandra,”
 he said slowly. “You've stood by us through so much and helped
father out so many times, and now it seems as if we were running
off and leaving you to face the worst of it. But it isn't as if
we could really ever be of any help to you. We are only one more
drag, one more thing you look out for and feel responsible for.
Father was never meant for a farmer, you know that. And I hate
it. We'd only get in deeper and deeper.”

“Yes, yes, Carl, I know. You are wasting your life here. You are
able to do much better things. You are nearly nineteen now, and
I wouldn't have you stay. I've always hoped you would get away.
But I can't help feeling scared when I think how I will miss
you--more than you will ever know.” She brushed the tears from her
cheeks, not trying to hide them.

“But, Alexandra,” he said sadly and wistfully, “I've never been
any real help to you, beyond sometimes trying to keep the boys in
a good humor.”

Alexandra smiled and shook her head. “Oh, it's not that. Nothing
like that. It's by understanding me, and the boys, and mother,
that you've helped me. I expect that is the only way one person
ever really can help another. I think you are about the only one
that ever helped me. Somehow it will take more courage to bear
your going than everything that has happened before.”

Carl looked at the ground. “You see, we've all depended so on you,”
 he said, “even father. He makes me laugh. When anything comes up
he always says, 'I wonder what the Bergsons are going to do about
that ? I guess I'll go and ask her.' I'll never forget that time,
when we first came here, and our horse had the colic, and I ran
over to your place--your father was away, and you came home with me
and showed father how to let the wind out of the horse. You were
only a little girl then, but you knew ever so much more about farm
work than poor father. You remember how homesick I used to get,
and what long talks we used to have coming from school ? We've
someway always felt alike about things.”

“Yes, that's it; we've liked the same things and we've liked them
together, without anybody else knowing. And we've had good times,
hunting for Christmas trees and going for ducks and making our plum
wine together every year. We've never either of us had any other
close friend. And now--” Alexandra wiped her eyes with the corner
of her apron, “and now I must remember that you are going where
you will have many friends, and will find the work you were meant
to do. But you'll write to me, Carl ? That will mean a great deal
to me here.”

“I'll write as long as I live,” cried the boy impetuously. “And
I'll be working for you as much as for myself, Alexandra. I want
to do something you'll like and be proud of. I'm a fool here, but
I know I can do something!” He sat up and frowned at the red grass.

Alexandra sighed. “How discouraged the boys will be when they
hear. They always come home from town discouraged, anyway. So
many people are trying to leave the country, and they talk to our
boys and make them low-spirited. I'm afraid they are beginning to
feel hard toward me because I won't listen to any talk about going.
Sometimes I feel like I'm getting tired of standing up for this
country.”

“I won't tell the boys yet, if you'd rather not.”

“Oh, I'll tell them myself, to-night, when they come home. They'll
be talking wild, anyway, and no good comes of keeping bad news.
It's all harder on them than it is on me. Lou wants to get married,
poor boy, and he can't until times are better. See, there goes the
sun, Carl. I must be getting back. Mother will want her potatoes.
It's chilly already, the moment the light goes.”

Alexandra rose and looked about. A golden afterglow throbbed in
the west, but the country already looked empty and mournful. A dark
moving mass came over the western hill, the Lee boy was bringing in
the herd from the other half-section. Emil ran from the windmill
to open the corral gate. From the log house, on the little rise
across the draw, the smoke was curling. The cattle lowed and
bellowed. In the sky the pale half-moon was slowly silvering.
Alexandra and Carl walked together down the potato rows. “I have
to keep telling myself what is going to happen,” she said softly.
“Since you have been here, ten years now, I have never really been
lonely. But I can remember what it was like before. Now I shall
have nobody but Emil. But he is my boy, and he is tender-hearted.”

That night, when the boys were called to supper, they sat down
moodily. They had worn their coats to town, but they ate in their
striped shirts and suspenders. They were grown men now, and, as
Alexandra said, for the last few years they had been growing more
and more like themselves. Lou was still the slighter of the two,
the quicker and more intelligent, but apt to go off at half-cock.
He had a lively blue eye, a thin, fair skin (always burned red to
the neckband of his shirt in summer), stiff, yellow hair that would
not lie down on his head, and a bristly little yellow mustache,
of which he was very proud. Oscar could not grow a mustache; his
pale face was as bare as an egg, and his white eyebrows gave it an
empty look. He was a man of powerful body and unusual endurance;
the sort of man you could attach to a corn-sheller as you would
an engine. He would turn it all day, without hurrying, without
slowing down. But he was as indolent of mind as he was unsparing
of his body. His love of routine amounted to a vice. He worked
like an insect, always doing the same thing over in the same way,
regardless of whether it was best or no. He felt that there was
a sovereign virtue in mere bodily toil, and he rather liked to
do things in the hardest way. If a field had once been in corn,
he couldn't bear to put it into wheat. He liked to begin his
corn-planting at the same time every year, whether the season were
backward or forward. He seemed to feel that by his own irreproachable
regularity he would clear himself of blame and reprove the weather.
When the wheat crop failed, he threshed the straw at a dead loss
to demonstrate how little grain there was, and thus prove his case
against Providence.

Lou, on the other hand, was fussy and flighty; always planned to
get through two days' work in one, and often got only the least
important things done. He liked to keep the place up, but he never
got round to doing odd jobs until he had to neglect more pressing
work to attend to them. In the middle of the wheat harvest, when
the grain was over-ripe and every hand was needed, he would stop
to mend fences or to patch the harness; then dash down to the
field and overwork and be laid up in bed for a week. The two boys
balanced each other, and they pulled well together. They had been
good friends since they were children. One seldom went anywhere,
even to town, without the other.

To-night, after they sat down to supper, Oscar kept looking at Lou
as if he expected him to say something, and Lou blinked his eyes
and frowned at his plate. It was Alexandra herself who at last
opened the discussion.

“The Linstrums,” she said calmly, as she put another plate of hot
biscuit on the table, “are going back to St. Louis. The old man
is going to work in the cigar factory again.”

At this Lou plunged in. “You see, Alexandra, everybody who can
crawl out is going away. There's no use of us trying to stick it
out, just to be stubborn. There's something in knowing when to
quit.”

“Where do you want to go, Lou ?”

“Any place where things will grow,” said Oscar grimly.

Lou reached for a potato. “Chris Arnson has traded his half-section
for a place down on the river.”

“Who did he trade with ?”

“Charley Fuller, in town.”

“Fuller the real estate man ? You see, Lou, that Fuller has a head
on him. He's buying and trading for every bit of land he can get
up here. It'll make him a rich man, some day.”

“He's rich now, that's why he can take a chance.”

“Why can't we ? We'll live longer than he will. Some day the land
itself will be worth more than all we can ever raise on it.”

Lou laughed. “It could be worth that, and still not be worth
much. Why, Alexandra, you don't know what you're talking about.
Our place wouldn't bring now what it would six years ago. The
fellows that settled up here just made a mistake. Now they're
beginning to see this high land wasn't never meant to grow nothing
on, and everybody who ain't fixed to graze cattle is trying to
crawl out. It's too high to farm up here. All the Americans are
skinning out. That man Percy Adams, north of town, told me that
he was going to let Fuller take his land and stuff for four hundred
dollars and a ticket to Chicago.”

“There's Fuller again!” Alexandra exclaimed. “I wish that man
would take me for a partner. He's feathering his nest! If only
poor people could learn a little from rich people! But all these
fellows who are running off are bad farmers, like poor Mr. Linstrum.
They couldn't get ahead even in good years, and they all got into
debt while father was getting out. I think we ought to hold on as
long as we can on father's account. He was so set on keeping this
land. He must have seen harder times than this, here. How was it
in the early days, mother ?”

Mrs. Bergson was weeping quietly. These family discussions always
depressed her, and made her remember all that she had been torn
away from. “I don't see why the boys are always taking on about
going away,” she said, wiping her eyes. “I don't want to move
again; out to some raw place, maybe, where we'd be worse off than
we are here, and all to do over again. I won't move! If the rest
of you go, I will ask some of the neighbors to take me in, and stay
and be buried by father. I'm not going to leave him by himself
on the prairie, for cattle to run over.” She began to cry more
bitterly.

The boys looked angry. Alexandra put a soothing hand on her mother's
shoulder. “There's no question of that, mother. You don't have
to go if you don't want to. A third of the place belongs to you
by American law, and we can't sell without your consent. We only
want you to advise us. How did it use to be when you and father
first came ? Was it really as bad as this, or not ?”

“Oh, worse! Much worse,” moaned Mrs. Bergson. “Drouth, chince-bugs,
hail, everything! My garden all cut to pieces like sauerkraut. No
grapes on the creek, no nothing. The people all lived just like
coyotes.”

Oscar got up and tramped out of the kitchen. Lou followed him.
They felt that Alexandra had taken an unfair advantage in turning
their mother loose on them. The next morning they were silent and
reserved. They did not offer to take the women to church, but went
down to the barn immediately after breakfast and stayed there all
day. When Carl Linstrum came over in the afternoon, Alexandra
winked to him and pointed toward the barn. He understood her and
went down to play cards with the boys. They believed that a very
wicked thing to do on Sunday, and it relieved their feelings.

Alexandra stayed in the house. On Sunday afternoon Mrs. Bergson
always took a nap, and Alexandra read. During the week she read
only the newspaper, but on Sunday, and in the long evenings of
winter, she read a good deal; read a few things over a great many
times. She knew long portions of the “Frithjof Saga” by heart,
and, like most Swedes who read at all, she was fond of Longfellow's
verse,--the ballads and the “Golden Legend” and “The Spanish Student.”
 To-day she sat in the wooden rocking-chair with the Swedish Bible
open on her knees, but she was not reading. She was looking
thoughtfully away at the point where the upland road disappeared
over the rim of the prairie. Her body was in an attitude of perfect
repose, such as it was apt to take when she was thinking earnestly.
Her mind was slow, truthful, steadfast. She had not the least
spark of cleverness.

All afternoon the sitting-room was full of quiet and sunlight.
Emil was making rabbit traps in the kitchen shed. The hens were
clucking and scratching brown holes in the flower beds, and the
wind was teasing the prince's feather by the door.

That evening Carl came in with the boys to supper.

“Emil,” said Alexandra, when they were all seated at the table,
“how would you like to go traveling ? Because I am going to take
a trip, and you can go with me if you want to.”

The boys looked up in amazement; they were always afraid of
Alexandra's schemes. Carl was interested.

“I've been thinking, boys,” she went on, “that maybe I am too set
against making a change. I'm going to take Brigham and the buckboard
to-morrow and drive down to the river country and spend a few days
looking over what they've got down there. If I find anything good,
you boys can go down and make a trade.”

“Nobody down there will trade for anything up here,” said Oscar
gloomily.

“That's just what I want to find out. Maybe they are just as
discontented down there as we are up here. Things away from home
often look better than they are. You know what your Hans Andersen
book says, Carl, about the Swedes liking to buy Danish bread and
the Danes liking to buy Swedish bread, because people always think
the bread of another country is better than their own. Anyway,
I've heard so much about the river farms, I won't be satisfied till
I've seen for myself.”

Lou fidgeted. “Look out! Don't agree to anything. Don't let them
fool you.”

Lou was apt to be fooled himself. He had not yet learned to keep
away from the shell-game wagons that followed the circus.

After supper Lou put on a necktie and went across the fields to
court Annie Lee, and Carl and Oscar sat down to a game of checkers,
while Alexandra read “The Swiss Family Robinson” aloud to her mother
and Emil. It was not long before the two boys at the table neglected
their game to listen. They were all big children together, and they
found the adventures of the family in the tree house so absorbing
that they gave them their undivided attention.




V

Alexandra and Emil spent five days down among the river farms,
driving up and down the valley. Alexandra talked to the men about
their crops and to the women about their poultry. She spent a
whole day with one young farmer who had been away at school, and
who was experimenting with a new kind of clover hay. She learned
a great deal. As they drove along, she and Emil talked and planned.
At last, on the sixth day, Alexandra turned Brigham's head northward
and left the river behind.

“There's nothing in it for us down there, Emil. There are a few
fine farms, but they are owned by the rich men in town, and couldn't
be bought. Most of the land is rough and hilly. They can always
scrape along down there, but they can never do anything big. Down
there they have a little certainty, but up with us there is a big
chance. We must have faith in the high land, Emil. I want to hold
on harder than ever, and when you're a man you'll thank me.” She
urged Brigham forward.

When the road began to climb the first long swells of the Divide,
Alexandra hummed an old Swedish hymn, and Emil wondered why his
sister looked so happy. Her face was so radiant that he felt shy
about asking her. For the first time, perhaps, since that land
emerged from the waters of geologic ages, a human face was set toward
it with love and yearning. It seemed beautiful to her, rich and
strong and glorious. Her eyes drank in the breadth of it, until
her tears blinded her. Then the Genius of the Divide, the great,
free spirit which breathes across it, must have bent lower than
it ever bent to a human will before. The history of every country
begins in the heart of a man or a woman.

Alexandra reached home in the afternoon. That evening she held
a family council and told her brothers all that she had seen and
heard.

“I want you boys to go down yourselves and look it over. Nothing
will convince you like seeing with your own eyes. The river land
was settled before this, and so they are a few years ahead of us,
and have learned more about farming. The land sells for three
times as much as this, but in five years we will double it. The
rich men down there own all the best land, and they are buying
all they can get. The thing to do is to sell our cattle and what
little old corn we have, and buy the Linstrum place. Then the next
thing to do is to take out two loans on our half-sections, and buy
Peter Crow's place; raise every dollar we can, and buy every acre
we can.”

“Mortgage the homestead again ?” Lou cried. He sprang up and began
to wind the clock furiously. “I won't slave to pay off another
mortgage. I'll never do it. You'd just as soon kill us all,
Alexandra, to carry out some scheme!”

Oscar rubbed his high, pale forehead. “How do you propose to pay
off your mortgages ?”

Alexandra looked from one to the other and bit her lip. They had
never seen her so nervous. “See here,” she brought out at last.
“We borrow the money for six years. Well, with the money we buy
a half-section from Linstrum and a half from Crow, and a quarter
from Struble, maybe. That will give us upwards of fourteen hundred
acres, won't it ? You won't have to pay off your mortgages for six
years. By that time, any of this land will be worth thirty dollars
an acre--it will be worth fifty, but we'll say thirty; then you
can sell a garden patch anywhere, and pay off a debt of sixteen
hundred dollars. It's not the principal I'm worried about, it's
the interest and taxes. We'll have to strain to meet the payments.
But as sure as we are sitting here to-night, we can sit down here
ten years from now independent landowners, not struggling farmers
any longer. The chance that father was always looking for has
come.”

Lou was pacing the floor. “But how do you KNOW that land is going
to go up enough to pay the mortgages and--”

“And make us rich besides ?” Alexandra put in firmly. “I can't
explain that, Lou. You'll have to take my word for it. I KNOW,
that's all. When you drive about over the country you can feel it
coming.”

Oscar had been sitting with his head lowered, his hands hanging
between his knees. “But we can't work so much land,” he said
dully, as if he were talking to himself. “We can't even try. It
would just lie there and we'd work ourselves to death.” He sighed,
and laid his calloused fist on the table.

Alexandra's eyes filled with tears. She put her hand on his
shoulder. “You poor boy, you won't have to work it. The men in
town who are buying up other people's land don't try to farm it.
They are the men to watch, in a new country. Let's try to do
like the shrewd ones, and not like these stupid fellows. I don't
want you boys always to have to work like this. I want you to be
independent, and Emil to go to school.”

Lou held his head as if it were splitting. “Everybody will say we
are crazy. It must be crazy, or everybody would be doing it.”

“If they were, we wouldn't have much chance. No, Lou, I was talking
about that with the smart young man who is raising the new kind
of clover. He says the right thing is usually just what everybody
don't do. Why are we better fixed than any of our neighbors ? Because
father had more brains. Our people were better people than these
in the old country. We OUGHT to do more than they do, and see
further ahead. Yes, mother, I'm going to clear the table now.”

Alexandra rose. The boys went to the stable to see to the stock,
and they were gone a long while. When they came back Lou played on
his DRAGHARMONIKA and Oscar sat figuring at his father's secretary
all evening. They said nothing more about Alexandra's project,
but she felt sure now that they would consent to it. Just before
bedtime Oscar went out for a pail of water. When he did not come
back, Alexandra threw a shawl over her head and ran down the path
to the windmill. She found him sitting there with his head in his
hands, and she sat down beside him.

“Don't do anything you don't want to do, Oscar,” she whispered.
She waited a moment, but he did not stir. “I won't say any more
about it, if you'd rather not. What makes you so discouraged ?”

“I dread signing my name to them pieces of paper,” he said slowly.
“All the time I was a boy we had a mortgage hanging over us.”

“Then don't sign one. I don't want you to, if you feel that way.”

Oscar shook his head. “No, I can see there's a chance that way.
I've thought a good while there might be. We're in so deep now, we
might as well go deeper. But it's hard work pulling out of debt.
Like pulling a threshing-machine out of the mud; breaks your back.
Me and Lou's worked hard, and I can't see it's got us ahead much.”

“Nobody knows about that as well as I do, Oscar. That's why I want
to try an easier way. I don't want you to have to grub for every
dollar.”

“Yes, I know what you mean. Maybe it'll come out right. But signing
papers is signing papers. There ain't no maybe about that.” He
took his pail and trudged up the path to the house.

Alexandra drew her shawl closer about her and stood leaning against
the frame of the mill, looking at the stars which glittered so
keenly through the frosty autumn air. She always loved to watch
them, to think of their vastness and distance, and of their ordered
march. It fortified her to reflect upon the great operations
of nature, and when she thought of the law that lay behind them,
she felt a sense of personal security. That night she had a new
consciousness of the country, felt almost a new relation to it.
Even her talk with the boys had not taken away the feeling that had
overwhelmed her when she drove back to the Divide that afternoon.
She had never known before how much the country meant to her. The
chirping of the insects down in the long grass had been like the
sweetest music. She had felt as if her heart were hiding down
there, somewhere, with the quail and the plover and all the little
wild things that crooned or buzzed in the sun. Under the long
shaggy ridges, she felt the future stirring.




PART II. Neighboring Fields




I

IT is sixteen years since John Bergson died. His wife now lies
beside him, and the white shaft that marks their graves gleams
across the wheat-fields. Could he rise from beneath it, he would
not know the country under which he has been asleep. The shaggy coat
of the prairie, which they lifted to make him a bed, has vanished
forever. From the Norwegian graveyard one looks out over a vast
checker-board, marked off in squares of wheat and corn; light and
dark, dark and light. Telephone wires hum along the white roads,
which always run at right angles. From the graveyard gate one can
count a dozen gayly painted farmhouses; the gilded weather-vanes
on the big red barns wink at each other across the green and brown
and yellow fields. The light steel windmills tremble throughout
their frames and tug at their moorings, as they vibrate in the wind
that often blows from one week's end to another across that high,
active, resolute stretch of country.

The Divide is now thickly populated. The rich soil yields heavy
harvests; the dry, bracing climate and the smoothness of the land
make labor easy for men and beasts. There are few scenes more
gratifying than a spring plowing in that country, where the furrows
of a single field often lie a mile in length, and the brown earth,
with such a strong, clean smell, and such a power of growth and
fertility in it, yields itself eagerly to the plow; rolls away
from the shear, not even dimming the brightness of the metal, with
a soft, deep sigh of happiness. The wheat-cutting sometimes goes
on all night as well as all day, and in good seasons there are
scarcely men and horses enough to do the harvesting. The grain is
so heavy that it bends toward the blade and cuts like velvet.

There is something frank and joyous and young in the open face
of the country. It gives itself ungrudgingly to the moods of the
season, holding nothing back. Like the plains of Lombardy, it
seems to rise a little to meet the sun. The air and the earth are
curiously mated and intermingled, as if the one were the breath
of the other. You feel in the atmosphere the same tonic, puissant
quality that is in the tilth, the same strength and resoluteness.

One June morning a young man stood at the gate of the Norwegian
graveyard, sharpening his scythe in strokes unconsciously timed to
the tune he was whistling. He wore a flannel cap and duck trousers,
and the sleeves of his white flannel shirt were rolled back to
the elbow. When he was satisfied with the edge of his blade, he
slipped the whetstone into his hip pocket and began to swing his
scythe, still whistling, but softly, out of respect to the quiet
folk about him. Unconscious respect, probably, for he seemed
intent upon his own thoughts, and, like the Gladiator's, they were
far away. He was a splendid figure of a boy, tall and straight
as a young pine tree, with a handsome head, and stormy gray eyes,
deeply set under a serious brow. The space between his two front
teeth, which were unusually far apart, gave him the proficiency
in whistling for which he was distinguished at college. (He also
played the cornet in the University band.)

When the grass required his close attention, or when he had to
stoop to cut about a head-stone, he paused in his lively air,--the
“Jewel” song,--taking it up where he had left it when his scythe
swung free again. He was not thinking about the tired pioneers
over whom his blade glittered. The old wild country, the struggle
in which his sister was destined to succeed while so many men broke
their hearts and died, he can scarcely remember. That is all among
the dim things of childhood and has been forgotten in the brighter
pattern life weaves to-day, in the bright facts of being captain
of the track team, and holding the interstate record for the high
jump, in the all-suffusing brightness of being twenty-one. Yet
sometimes, in the pauses of his work, the young man frowned and
looked at the ground with an intentness which suggested that even
twenty-one might have its problems.

When he had been mowing the better part of an hour, he heard the
rattle of a light cart on the road behind him. Supposing that it
was his sister coming back from one of her farms, he kept on with
his work. The cart stopped at the gate and a merry contralto voice
called, “Almost through, Emil ?” He dropped his scythe and went
toward the fence, wiping his face and neck with his handkerchief.
In the cart sat a young woman who wore driving gauntlets and a wide
shade hat, trimmed with red poppies. Her face, too, was rather
like a poppy, round and brown, with rich color in her cheeks and
lips, and her dancing yellow-brown eyes bubbled with gayety. The
wind was flapping her big hat and teasing a curl of her chestnut-colored
hair. She shook her head at the tall youth.

“What time did you get over here ? That's not much of a job for
an athlete. Here I've been to town and back. Alexandra lets you
sleep late. Oh, I know! Lou's wife was telling me about the way
she spoils you. I was going to give you a lift, if you were done.”
 She gathered up her reins.

“But I will be, in a minute. Please wait for me, Marie,” Emil
coaxed. “Alexandra sent me to mow our lot, but I've done half a
dozen others, you see. Just wait till I finish off the Kourdnas'.
By the way, they were Bohemians. Why aren't they up in the Catholic
graveyard ?”

“Free-thinkers,” replied the young woman laconically.

“Lots of the Bohemian boys at the University are,” said Emil, taking
up his scythe again. “What did you ever burn John Huss for, anyway ?
It's made an awful row. They still jaw about it in history classes.”

“We'd do it right over again, most of us,” said the young woman
hotly. “Don't they ever teach you in your history classes that
you'd all be heathen Turks if it hadn't been for the Bohemians ?”

Emil had fallen to mowing. “Oh, there's no denying you're a spunky
little bunch, you Czechs,” he called back over his shoulder.

Marie Shabata settled herself in her seat and watched the rhythmical
movement of the young man's long arms, swinging her foot as if
in time to some air that was going through her mind. The minutes
passed. Emil mowed vigorously and Marie sat sunning herself and
watching the long grass fall. She sat with the ease that belongs
to persons of an essentially happy nature, who can find a comfortable
spot almost anywhere; who are supple, and quick in adapting themselves
to circumstances. After a final swish, Emil snapped the gate and
sprang into the cart, holding his scythe well out over the wheel.
“There,” he sighed. “I gave old man Lee a cut or so, too. Lou's
wife needn't talk. I never see Lou's scythe over here.”

Marie clucked to her horse. “Oh, you know Annie!” She looked at
the young man's bare arms. “How brown you've got since you came
home. I wish I had an athlete to mow my orchard. I get wet to my
knees when I go down to pick cherries.”

“You can have one, any time you want him. Better wait until after
it rains.” Emil squinted off at the horizon as if he were looking
for clouds.

“Will you ? Oh, there's a good boy!” She turned her head to him
with a quick, bright smile. He felt it rather than saw it. Indeed,
he had looked away with the purpose of not seeing it. “I've been
up looking at Angelique's wedding clothes,” Marie went on, “and
I'm so excited I can hardly wait until Sunday. Amedee will be
a handsome bridegroom. Is anybody but you going to stand up with
him ? Well, then it will be a handsome wedding party.” She made a
droll face at Emil, who flushed. “Frank,” Marie continued, flicking
her horse, “is cranky at me because I loaned his saddle to Jan
Smirka, and I'm terribly afraid he won't take me to the dance in
the evening. Maybe the supper will tempt him. All Angelique's
folks are baking for it, and all Amedee's twenty cousins. There
will be barrels of beer. If once I get Frank to the supper, I'll
see that I stay for the dance. And by the way, Emil, you mustn't
dance with me but once or twice. You must dance with all the French
girls. It hurts their feelings if you don't. They think you're
proud because you've been away to school or something.”

Emil sniffed. “How do you know they think that ?”

“Well, you didn't dance with them much at Raoul Marcel's party, and
I could tell how they took it by the way they looked at you--and
at me.”

“All right,” said Emil shortly, studying the glittering blade of
his scythe.

They drove westward toward Norway Creek, and toward a big white
house that stood on a hill, several miles across the fields. There
were so many sheds and outbuildings grouped about it that the
place looked not unlike a tiny village. A stranger, approaching
it, could not help noticing the beauty and fruitfulness of the
outlying fields. There was something individual about the great
farm, a most unusual trimness and care for detail. On either side
of the road, for a mile before you reached the foot of the hill,
stood tall osage orange hedges, their glossy green marking off
the yellow fields. South of the hill, in a low, sheltered swale,
surrounded by a mulberry hedge, was the orchard, its fruit trees
knee-deep in timothy grass. Any one thereabouts would have told
you that this was one of the richest farms on the Divide, and that
the farmer was a woman, Alexandra Bergson.

If you go up the hill and enter Alexandra's big house, you will
find that it is curiously unfinished and uneven in comfort. One
room is papered, carpeted, over-furnished; the next is almost
bare. The pleasantest rooms in the house are the kitchen--where
Alexandra's three young Swedish girls chatter and cook and pickle
and preserve all summer long--and the sitting-room, in which
Alexandra has brought together the old homely furniture that the
Bergsons used in their first log house, the family portraits, and
the few things her mother brought from Sweden.

When you go out of the house into the flower garden, there you feel
again the order and fine arrangement manifest all over the great
farm; in the fencing and hedging, in the windbreaks and sheds, in
the symmetrical pasture ponds, planted with scrub willows to give
shade to the cattle in fly-time. There is even a white row of
beehives in the orchard, under the walnut trees. You feel that,
properly, Alexandra's house is the big out-of-doors, and that it
is in the soil that she expresses herself best.




II

Emil reached home a little past noon, and when he went into the
kitchen Alexandra was already seated at the head of the long table,
having dinner with her men, as she always did unless there were
visitors. He slipped into his empty place at his sister's right.
The three pretty young Swedish girls who did Alexandra's housework
were cutting pies, refilling coffeecups, placing platters of bread
and meat and potatoes upon the red tablecloth, and continually
getting in each other's way between the table and the stove. To be
sure they always wasted a good deal of time getting in each other's
way and giggling at each other's mistakes. But, as Alexandra had
pointedly told her sisters-in-law, it was to hear them giggle that
she kept three young things in her kitchen; the work she could
do herself, if it were necessary. These girls, with their long
letters from home, their finery, and their love-affairs, afforded
her a great deal of entertainment, and they were company for her
when Emil was away at school.

Of the youngest girl, Signa, who has a pretty figure, mottled pink
cheeks, and yellow hair, Alexandra is very fond, though she keeps
a sharp eye upon her. Signa is apt to be skittish at mealtime, when
the men are about, and to spill the coffee or upset the cream. It
is supposed that Nelse Jensen, one of the six men at the dinner-table,
is courting Signa, though he has been so careful not to commit
himself that no one in the house, least of all Signa, can tell
just how far the matter has progressed. Nelse watches her glumly
as she waits upon the table, and in the evening he sits on a bench
behind the stove with his DRAGHARMONIKA, playing mournful airs
and watching her as she goes about her work. When Alexandra asked
Signa whether she thought Nelse was in earnest, the poor child hid
her hands under her apron and murmured, “I don't know, ma'm. But
he scolds me about everything, like as if he wanted to have me!”

At Alexandra's left sat a very old man, barefoot and wearing a long
blue blouse, open at the neck. His shaggy head is scarcely whiter
than it was sixteen years ago, but his little blue eyes have become
pale and watery, and his ruddy face is withered, like an apple that
has clung all winter to the tree. When Ivar lost his land through
mismanagement a dozen years ago, Alexandra took him in, and he has
been a member of her household ever since. He is too old to work
in the fields, but he hitches and unhitches the work-teams and
looks after the health of the stock. Sometimes of a winter evening
Alexandra calls him into the sitting-room to read the Bible aloud
to her, for he still reads very well. He dislikes human habitations,
so Alexandra has fitted him up a room in the barn, where he is very
comfortable, being near the horses and, as he says, further from
temptations. No one has ever found out what his temptations are.
In cold weather he sits by the kitchen fire and makes hammocks
or mends harness until it is time to go to bed. Then he says his
prayers at great length behind the stove, puts on his buffalo-skin
coat and goes out to his room in the barn.

Alexandra herself has changed very little. Her figure is fuller,
and she has more color. She seems sunnier and more vigorous than
she did as a young girl. But she still has the same calmness and
deliberation of manner, the same clear eyes, and she still wears
her hair in two braids wound round her head. It is so curly that
fiery ends escape from the braids and make her head look like one
of the big double sunflowers that fringe her vegetable garden.
Her face is always tanned in summer, for her sunbonnet is oftener
on her arm than on her head. But where her collar falls away from
her neck, or where her sleeves are pushed back from her wrist, the
skin is of such smoothness and whiteness as none but Swedish women
ever possess; skin with the freshness of the snow itself.

Alexandra did not talk much at the table, but she encouraged her
men to talk, and she always listened attentively, even when they
seemed to be talking foolishly.

To-day Barney Flinn, the big red-headed Irishman who had been with
Alexandra for five years and who was actually her foreman, though
he had no such title, was grumbling about the new silo she had put
up that spring. It happened to be the first silo on the Divide,
and Alexandra's neighbors and her men were skeptical about it. “To
be sure, if the thing don't work, we'll have plenty of feed without
it, indeed,” Barney conceded.

Nelse Jensen, Signa's gloomy suitor, had his word. “Lou, he says
he wouldn't have no silo on his place if you'd give it to him.
He says the feed outen it gives the stock the bloat. He heard of
somebody lost four head of horses, feedin' 'em that stuff.”

Alexandra looked down the table from one to another. “Well,
the only way we can find out is to try. Lou and I have different
notions about feeding stock, and that's a good thing. It's bad if
all the members of a family think alike. They never get anywhere.
Lou can learn by my mistakes and I can learn by his. Isn't that
fair, Barney ?”

The Irishman laughed. He had no love for Lou, who was always uppish
with him and who said that Alexandra paid her hands too much. “I've
no thought but to give the thing an honest try, mum. 'T would be
only right, after puttin' so much expense into it. Maybe Emil will
come out an' have a look at it wid me.” He pushed back his chair,
took his hat from the nail, and marched out with Emil, who, with
his university ideas, was supposed to have instigated the silo.
The other hands followed them, all except old Ivar. He had been
depressed throughout the meal and had paid no heed to the talk of
the men, even when they mentioned cornstalk bloat, upon which he
was sure to have opinions.

“Did you want to speak to me, Ivar ?” Alexandra asked as she rose
from the table. “Come into the sitting-room.”

The old man followed Alexandra, but when she motioned him to a chair
he shook his head. She took up her workbasket and waited for him
to speak. He stood looking at the carpet, his bushy head bowed,
his hands clasped in front of him. Ivar's bandy legs seemed to
have grown shorter with years, and they were completely misfitted
to his broad, thick body and heavy shoulders.

“Well, Ivar, what is it ?” Alexandra asked after she had waited
longer than usual.

Ivar had never learned to speak English and his Norwegian was quaint
and grave, like the speech of the more old-fashioned people. He
always addressed Alexandra in terms of the deepest respect, hoping
to set a good example to the kitchen girls, whom he thought too
familiar in their manners.

“Mistress,” he began faintly, without raising his eyes, “the folk
have been looking coldly at me of late. You know there has been
talk.”

“Talk about what, Ivar ?”

“About sending me away; to the asylum.”

Alexandra put down her sewing-basket. “Nobody has come to me with
such talk,” she said decidedly. “Why need you listen ? You know
I would never consent to such a thing.”

Ivar lifted his shaggy head and looked at her out of his little
eyes. “They say that you cannot prevent it if the folk complain of
me, if your brothers complain to the authorities. They say that
your brothers are afraid--God forbid!--that I may do you some
injury when my spells are on me. Mistress, how can any one think
that ?--that I could bite the hand that fed me!” The tears trickled
down on the old man's beard.

Alexandra frowned. “Ivar, I wonder at you, that you should come
bothering me with such nonsense. I am still running my own house,
and other people have nothing to do with either you or me. So long
as I am suited with you, there is nothing to be said.”

Ivar pulled a red handkerchief out of the breast of his blouse and
wiped his eyes and beard. “But I should not wish you to keep me
if, as they say, it is against your interests, and if it is hard
for you to get hands because I am here.”

Alexandra made an impatient gesture, but the old man put out his
hand and went on earnestly:--

“Listen, mistress, it is right that you should take these things
into account. You know that my spells come from God, and that
I would not harm any living creature. You believe that every one
should worship God in the way revealed to him. But that is not
the way of this country. The way here is for all to do alike. I
am despised because I do not wear shoes, because I do not cut my
hair, and because I have visions. At home, in the old country,
there were many like me, who had been touched by God, or who had
seen things in the graveyard at night and were different afterward.
We thought nothing of it, and let them alone. But here, if a man
is different in his feet or in his head, they put him in the asylum.
Look at Peter Kralik; when he was a boy, drinking out of a creek,
he swallowed a snake, and always after that he could eat only
such food as the creature liked, for when he ate anything else, it
became enraged and gnawed him. When he felt it whipping about in
him, he drank alcohol to stupefy it and get some ease for himself.
He could work as good as any man, and his head was clear, but they
locked him up for being different in his stomach. That is the way;
they have built the asylum for people who are different, and they
will not even let us live in the holes with the badgers. Only
your great prosperity has protected me so far. If you had had
ill-fortune, they would have taken me to Hastings long ago.”

As Ivar talked, his gloom lifted. Alexandra had found that she
could often break his fasts and long penances by talking to him
and letting him pour out the thoughts that troubled him. Sympathy
always cleared his mind, and ridicule was poison to him.

“There is a great deal in what you say, Ivar. Like as not they
will be wanting to take me to Hastings because I have built a silo;
and then I may take you with me. But at present I need you here.
Only don't come to me again telling me what people say. Let people
go on talking as they like, and we will go on living as we think
best. You have been with me now for twelve years, and I have gone
to you for advice oftener than I have ever gone to any one. That
ought to satisfy you.”

Ivar bowed humbly. “Yes, mistress, I shall not trouble you with
their talk again. And as for my feet, I have observed your wishes
all these years, though you have never questioned me; washing them
every night, even in winter.”

Alexandra laughed. “Oh, never mind about your feet, Ivar. We can
remember when half our neighbors went barefoot in summer. I expect
old Mrs. Lee would love to slip her shoes off now sometimes, if
she dared. I'm glad I'm not Lou's mother-in-law.”

Ivar looked about mysteriously and lowered his voice almost to a
whisper. “You know what they have over at Lou's house ? A great
white tub, like the stone water-troughs in the old country, to wash
themselves in. When you sent me over with the strawberries, they
were all in town but the old woman Lee and the baby. She took me
in and showed me the thing, and she told me it was impossible to
wash yourself clean in it, because, in so much water, you could
not make a strong suds. So when they fill it up and send her in
there, she pretends, and makes a splashing noise. Then, when they
are all asleep, she washes herself in a little wooden tub she keeps
under her bed.”

Alexandra shook with laughter. “Poor old Mrs. Lee! They won't let
her wear nightcaps, either. Never mind; when she comes to visit
me, she can do all the old things in the old way, and have as much
beer as she wants. We'll start an asylum for old-time people,
Ivar.”

Ivar folded his big handkerchief carefully and thrust it back into
his blouse. “This is always the way, mistress. I come to you
sorrowing, and you send me away with a light heart. And will you
be so good as to tell the Irishman that he is not to work the brown
gelding until the sore on its shoulder is healed ?”

“That I will. Now go and put Emil's mare to the cart. I am going
to drive up to the north quarter to meet the man from town who is
to buy my alfalfa hay.”




III

Alexandra was to hear more of Ivar's case, however. On Sunday her
married brothers came to dinner. She had asked them for that day
because Emil, who hated family parties, would be absent, dancing
at Amedee Chevalier's wedding, up in the French country. The table
was set for company in the dining-room, where highly varnished
wood and colored glass and useless pieces of china were conspicuous
enough to satisfy the standards of the new prosperity. Alexandra
had put herself into the hands of the Hanover furniture dealer, and
he had conscientiously done his best to make her dining-room look
like his display window. She said frankly that she knew nothing
about such things, and she was willing to be governed by the general
conviction that the more useless and utterly unusable objects
were, the greater their virtue as ornament. That seemed reasonable
enough. Since she liked plain things herself, it was all the more
necessary to have jars and punchbowls and candlesticks in the company
rooms for people who did appreciate them. Her guests liked to see
about them these reassuring emblems of prosperity.

The family party was complete except for Emil, and Oscar's wife
who, in the country phrase, “was not going anywhere just now.”
 Oscar sat at the foot of the table and his four tow-headed little
boys, aged from twelve to five, were ranged at one side. Neither
Oscar nor Lou has changed much; they have simply, as Alexandra said
of them long ago, grown to be more and more like themselves. Lou
now looks the older of the two; his face is thin and shrewd and
wrinkled about the eyes, while Oscar's is thick and dull. For all
his dullness, however, Oscar makes more money than his brother,
which adds to Lou's sharpness and uneasiness and tempts him to
make a show. The trouble with Lou is that he is tricky, and his
neighbors have found out that, as Ivar says, he has not a fox's face
for nothing. Politics being the natural field for such talents,
he neglects his farm to attend conventions and to run for county
offices.

Lou's wife, formerly Annie Lee, has grown to look curiously like
her husband. Her face has become longer, sharper, more aggressive.
She wears her yellow hair in a high pompadour, and is bedecked with
rings and chains and “beauty pins.” Her tight, high-heeled shoes
give her an awkward walk, and she is always more or less preoccupied
with her clothes. As she sat at the table, she kept telling her
youngest daughter to “be careful now, and not drop anything on
mother.”

The conversation at the table was all in English. Oscar's wife,
from the malaria district of Missouri, was ashamed of marrying a
foreigner, and his boys do not understand a word of Swedish. Annie
and Lou sometimes speak Swedish at home, but Annie is almost as
much afraid of being “caught” at it as ever her mother was of being
caught barefoot. Oscar still has a thick accent, but Lou speaks
like anybody from Iowa.

“When I was in Hastings to attend the convention,” he was saying,
“I saw the superintendent of the asylum, and I was telling him about
Ivar's symptoms. He says Ivar's case is one of the most dangerous
kind, and it's a wonder he hasn't done something violent before
this.”

Alexandra laughed good-humoredly. “Oh, nonsense, Lou! The doctors
would have us all crazy if they could. Ivar's queer, certainly,
but he has more sense than half the hands I hire.”

Lou flew at his fried chicken. “Oh, I guess the doctor knows his
business, Alexandra. He was very much surprised when I told him
how you'd put up with Ivar. He says he's likely to set fire to the
barn any night, or to take after you and the girls with an axe.”

Little Signa, who was waiting on the table, giggled and fled to
the kitchen. Alexandra's eyes twinkled. “That was too much for
Signa, Lou. We all know that Ivar's perfectly harmless. The girls
would as soon expect me to chase them with an axe.”

Lou flushed and signaled to his wife. “All the same, the neighbors
will be having a say about it before long. He may burn anybody's
barn. It's only necessary for one property-owner in the township
to make complaint, and he'll be taken up by force. You'd better
send him yourself and not have any hard feelings.”

Alexandra helped one of her little nephews to gravy. “Well, Lou,
if any of the neighbors try that, I'll have myself appointed Ivar's
guardian and take the case to court, that's all. I am perfectly
satisfied with him.”

“Pass the preserves, Lou,” said Annie in a warning tone. She had
reasons for not wishing her husband to cross Alexandra too openly.
“But don't you sort of hate to have people see him around here,
Alexandra ?” she went on with persuasive smoothness. “He IS a
disgraceful object, and you're fixed up so nice now. It sort of
makes people distant with you, when they never know when they'll
hear him scratching about. My girls are afraid as death of him,
aren't you, Milly, dear ?”

Milly was fifteen, fat and jolly and pompadoured, with a creamy
complexion, square white teeth, and a short upper lip. She
looked like her grandmother Bergson, and had her comfortable and
comfort-loving nature. She grinned at her aunt, with whom she was
a great deal more at ease than she was with her mother. Alexandra
winked a reply.

“Milly needn't be afraid of Ivar. She's an especial favorite of
his. In my opinion Ivar has just as much right to his own way of
dressing and thinking as we have. But I'll see that he doesn't
bother other people. I'll keep him at home, so don't trouble any
more about him, Lou. I've been wanting to ask you about your new
bathtub. How does it work ?”

Annie came to the fore to give Lou time to recover himself. “Oh,
it works something grand! I can't keep him out of it. He washes
himself all over three times a week now, and uses all the hot water.
I think it's weakening to stay in as long as he does. You ought
to have one, Alexandra.”

“I'm thinking of it. I might have one put in the barn for Ivar,
if it will ease people's minds. But before I get a bathtub, I'm
going to get a piano for Milly.”

Oscar, at the end of the table, looked up from his plate. “What
does Milly want of a pianny ? What's the matter with her organ ?
She can make some use of that, and play in church.”

Annie looked flustered. She had begged Alexandra not to say
anything about this plan before Oscar, who was apt to be jealous
of what his sister did for Lou's children. Alexandra did not get
on with Oscar's wife at all. “Milly can play in church just the
same, and she'll still play on the organ. But practising on it
so much spoils her touch. Her teacher says so,” Annie brought out
with spirit.

Oscar rolled his eyes. “Well, Milly must have got on pretty good
if she's got past the organ. I know plenty of grown folks that
ain't,” he said bluntly.

Annie threw up her chin. “She has got on good, and she's going to
play for her commencement when she graduates in town next year.”

“Yes,” said Alexandra firmly, “I think Milly deserves a piano.
All the girls around here have been taking lessons for years, but
Milly is the only one of them who can ever play anything when you
ask her. I'll tell you when I first thought I would like to give
you a piano, Milly, and that was when you learned that book of old
Swedish songs that your grandfather used to sing. He had a sweet
tenor voice, and when he was a young man he loved to sing. I can
remember hearing him singing with the sailors down in the shipyard,
when I was no bigger than Stella here,” pointing to Annie's younger
daughter.

Milly and Stella both looked through the door into the sitting-room,
where a crayon portrait of John Bergson hung on the wall. Alexandra
had had it made from a little photograph, taken for his friends
just before he left Sweden; a slender man of thirty-five, with
soft hair curling about his high forehead, a drooping mustache,
and wondering, sad eyes that looked forward into the distance, as
if they already beheld the New World.

After dinner Lou and Oscar went to the orchard to pick cherries--they
had neither of them had the patience to grow an orchard of their
own--and Annie went down to gossip with Alexandra's kitchen girls
while they washed the dishes. She could always find out more about
Alexandra's domestic economy from the prattling maids than from
Alexandra herself, and what she discovered she used to her own
advantage with Lou. On the Divide, farmers' daughters no longer
went out into service, so Alexandra got her girls from Sweden, by
paying their fare over. They stayed with her until they married,
and were replaced by sisters or cousins from the old country.

Alexandra took her three nieces into the flower garden. She was
fond of the little girls, especially of Milly, who came to spend
a week with her aunt now and then, and read aloud to her from the
old books about the house, or listened to stories about the early
days on the Divide. While they were walking among the flower beds,
a buggy drove up the hill and stopped in front of the gate. A man
got out and stood talking to the driver. The little girls were
delighted at the advent of a stranger, some one from very far away,
they knew by his clothes, his gloves, and the sharp, pointed cut
of his dark beard. The girls fell behind their aunt and peeped out
at him from among the castor beans. The stranger came up to the
gate and stood holding his hat in his hand, smiling, while Alexandra
advanced slowly to meet him. As she approached he spoke in a low,
pleasant voice.

“Don't you know me, Alexandra ? I would have known you, anywhere.”

Alexandra shaded her eyes with her hand. Suddenly she took a quick
step forward. “Can it be!” she exclaimed with feeling; “can it be
that it is Carl Linstrum ? Why, Carl, it is!” She threw out both
her hands and caught his across the gate. “Sadie, Milly, run tell
your father and Uncle Oscar that our old friend Carl Linstrum is
here. Be quick! Why, Carl, how did it happen ? I can't believe
this!” Alexandra shook the tears from her eyes and laughed.

The stranger nodded to his driver, dropped his suitcase inside
the fence, and opened the gate. “Then you are glad to see me, and
you can put me up overnight ? I couldn't go through this country
without stopping off to have a look at you. How little you have
changed! Do you know, I was sure it would be like that. You
simply couldn't be different. How fine you are!” He stepped back
and looked at her admiringly.

Alexandra blushed and laughed again. “But you yourself, Carl--with
that beard--how could I have known you ? You went away a little
boy.” She reached for his suitcase and when he intercepted her
she threw up her hands. “You see, I give myself away. I have only
women come to visit me, and I do not know how to behave. Where is
your trunk ?”

“It's in Hanover. I can stay only a few days. I am on my way to
the coast.”

They started up the path. “A few days ? After all these years!”
 Alexandra shook her finger at him. “See this, you have walked
into a trap. You do not get away so easy.” She put her hand
affectionately on his shoulder. “You owe me a visit for the sake
of old times. Why must you go to the coast at all ?”

“Oh, I must! I am a fortune hunter. From Seattle I go on to
Alaska.”

“Alaska ?” She looked at him in astonishment. “Are you going to
paint the Indians ?”

“Paint ?” the young man frowned. “Oh! I'm not a painter, Alexandra.
I'm an engraver. I have nothing to do with painting.”

“But on my parlor wall I have the paintings--”

He interrupted nervously. “Oh, water-color sketches--done for
amusement. I sent them to remind you of me, not because they were
good. What a wonderful place you have made of this, Alexandra.”
 He turned and looked back at the wide, map-like prospect of field
and hedge and pasture. “I would never have believed it could be
done. I'm disappointed in my own eye, in my imagination.”

At this moment Lou and Oscar came up the hill from the orchard.
They did not quicken their pace when they saw Carl; indeed, they
did not openly look in his direction. They advanced distrustfully,
and as if they wished the distance were longer.

Alexandra beckoned to them. “They think I am trying to fool them.
Come, boys, it's Carl Linstrum, our old Carl!”

Lou gave the visitor a quick, sidelong glance and thrust out his
hand. “Glad to see you.”

Oscar followed with “How d' do.” Carl could not tell whether their
offishness came from unfriendliness or from embarrassment. He and
Alexandra led the way to the porch.

“Carl,” Alexandra explained, “is on his way to Seattle. He is
going to Alaska.”

Oscar studied the visitor's yellow shoes. “Got business there ?”
 he asked.

Carl laughed. “Yes, very pressing business. I'm going there to
get rich. Engraving's a very interesting profession, but a man
never makes any money at it. So I'm going to try the goldfields.”

Alexandra felt that this was a tactful speech, and Lou looked up
with some interest. “Ever done anything in that line before ?”

“No, but I'm going to join a friend of mine who went out from New
York and has done well. He has offered to break me in.”

“Turrible cold winters, there, I hear,” remarked Oscar. “I thought
people went up there in the spring.”

“They do. But my friend is going to spend the winter in Seattle and
I am to stay with him there and learn something about prospecting
before we start north next year.”

Lou looked skeptical. “Let's see, how long have you been away from
here ?”

“Sixteen years. You ought to remember that, Lou, for you were
married just after we went away.”

“Going to stay with us some time ?” Oscar asked.

“A few days, if Alexandra can keep me.”

“I expect you'll be wanting to see your old place,” Lou observed
more cordially. “You won't hardly know it. But there's a few
chunks of your old sod house left. Alexandra wouldn't never let
Frank Shabata plough over it.”

Annie Lee, who, ever since the visitor was announced, had been
touching up her hair and settling her lace and wishing she had worn
another dress, now emerged with her three daughters and introduced
them. She was greatly impressed by Carl's urban appearance, and
in her excitement talked very loud and threw her head about. “And
you ain't married yet ? At your age, now! Think of that! You'll
have to wait for Milly. Yes, we've got a boy, too. The youngest.
He's at home with his grandma. You must come over to see mother
and hear Milly play. She's the musician of the family. She does
pyrography, too. That's burnt wood, you know. You wouldn't believe
what she can do with her poker. Yes, she goes to school in town,
and she is the youngest in her class by two years.”

Milly looked uncomfortable and Carl took her hand again. He liked
her creamy skin and happy, innocent eyes, and he could see that her
mother's way of talking distressed her. “I'm sure she's a clever
little girl,” he murmured, looking at her thoughtfully. “Let me
see--Ah, it's your mother that she looks like, Alexandra. Mrs.
Bergson must have looked just like this when she was a little
girl. Does Milly run about over the country as you and Alexandra
used to, Annie ?”

Milly's mother protested. “Oh, my, no! Things has changed since
we was girls. Milly has it very different. We are going to rent
the place and move into town as soon as the girls are old enough
to go out into company. A good many are doing that here now. Lou
is going into business.”

Lou grinned. “That's what she says. You better go get your things
on. Ivar's hitching up,” he added, turning to Annie.

Young farmers seldom address their wives by name. It is always
“you,” or “she.”

Having got his wife out of the way, Lou sat down on the step and
began to whittle. “Well, what do folks in New York think of William
Jennings Bryan ?” Lou began to bluster, as he always did when he
talked politics. “We gave Wall Street a scare in ninety-six, all
right, and we're fixing another to hand them. Silver wasn't the
only issue,” he nodded mysteriously. “There's a good many things
got to be changed. The West is going to make itself heard.”

Carl laughed. “But, surely, it did do that, if nothing else.”

Lou's thin face reddened up to the roots of his bristly hair. “Oh,
we've only begun. We're waking up to a sense of our responsibilities,
out here, and we ain't afraid, neither. You fellows back there
must be a tame lot. If you had any nerve you'd get together and
march down to Wall Street and blow it up. Dynamite it, I mean,”
 with a threatening nod.

He was so much in earnest that Carl scarcely knew how to answer
him. “That would be a waste of powder. The same business would
go on in another street. The street doesn't matter. But what have
you fellows out here got to kick about ? You have the only safe
place there is. Morgan himself couldn't touch you. One only has
to drive through this country to see that you're all as rich as
barons.”

“We have a good deal more to say than we had when we were poor,”
 said Lou threateningly. “We're getting on to a whole lot of things.”

As Ivar drove a double carriage up to the gate, Annie came out in
a hat that looked like the model of a battleship. Carl rose and
took her down to the carriage, while Lou lingered for a word with
his sister.

“What do you suppose he's come for ?” he asked, jerking his head
toward the gate.

“Why, to pay us a visit. I've been begging him to for years.”

Oscar looked at Alexandra. “He didn't let you know he was coming ?”

“No. Why should he ? I told him to come at any time.”

Lou shrugged his shoulders. “He doesn't seem to have done much
for himself. Wandering around this way!”

Oscar spoke solemnly, as from the depths of a cavern. “He never
was much account.”

Alexandra left them and hurried down to the gate where Annie was
rattling on to Carl about her new dining-room furniture. “You
must bring Mr. Linstrum over real soon, only be sure to telephone
me first,” she called back, as Carl helped her into the carriage.
Old Ivar, his white head bare, stood holding the horses. Lou came
down the path and climbed into the front seat, took up the reins,
and drove off without saying anything further to any one. Oscar
picked up his youngest boy and trudged off down the road, the other
three trotting after him. Carl, holding the gate open for Alexandra,
began to laugh. “Up and coming on the Divide, eh, Alexandra ?” he
cried gayly.




IV

Carl had changed, Alexandra felt, much less than one might have
expected. He had not become a trim, self-satisfied city man. There
was still something homely and wayward and definitely personal
about him. Even his clothes, his Norfolk coat and his very high
collars, were a little unconventional. He seemed to shrink into
himself as he used to do; to hold himself away from things, as if
he were afraid of being hurt. In short, he was more self-conscious
than a man of thirty-five is expected to be. He looked older than
his years and not very strong. His black hair, which still hung
in a triangle over his pale forehead, was thin at the crown, and
there were fine, relentless lines about his eyes. His back, with
its high, sharp shoulders, looked like the back of an over-worked
German professor off on his holiday. His face was intelligent,
sensitive, unhappy.

That evening after supper, Carl and Alexandra were sitting by the
clump of castor beans in the middle of the flower garden. The
gravel paths glittered in the moonlight, and below them the fields
lay white and still.

“Do you know, Alexandra,” he was saying, “I've been thinking how
strangely things work out. I've been away engraving other men's
pictures, and you've stayed at home and made your own.” He pointed
with his cigar toward the sleeping landscape. “How in the world
have you done it ? How have your neighbors done it ?”

“We hadn't any of us much to do with it, Carl. The land did it.
It had its little joke. It pretended to be poor because nobody
knew how to work it right; and then, all at once, it worked itself.
It woke up out of its sleep and stretched itself, and it was so big,
so rich, that we suddenly found we were rich, just from sitting
still. As for me, you remember when I began to buy land. For
years after that I was always squeezing and borrowing until I was
ashamed to show my face in the banks. And then, all at once, men
began to come to me offering to lend me money--and I didn't need
it! Then I went ahead and built this house. I really built it
for Emil. I want you to see Emil, Carl. He is so different from
the rest of us!”

“How different ?”

“Oh, you'll see! I'm sure it was to have sons like Emil, and to
give them a chance, that father left the old country. It's curious,
too; on the outside Emil is just like an American boy,--he graduated
from the State University in June, you know,--but underneath he is
more Swedish than any of us. Sometimes he is so like father that
he frightens me; he is so violent in his feelings like that.”

“Is he going to farm here with you ?”

“He shall do whatever he wants to,” Alexandra declared warmly. “He
is going to have a chance, a whole chance; that's what I've worked
for. Sometimes he talks about studying law, and sometimes, just
lately, he's been talking about going out into the sand hills and
taking up more land. He has his sad times, like father. But I
hope he won't do that. We have land enough, at last!” Alexandra
laughed.

“How about Lou and Oscar ? They've done well, haven't they ?”

“Yes, very well; but they are different, and now that they have
farms of their own I do not see so much of them. We divided the
land equally when Lou married. They have their own way of doing
things, and they do not altogether like my way, I am afraid. Perhaps
they think me too independent. But I have had to think for myself
a good many years and am not likely to change. On the whole,
though, we take as much comfort in each other as most brothers and
sisters do. And I am very fond of Lou's oldest daughter.”

“I think I liked the old Lou and Oscar better, and they probably
feel the same about me. I even, if you can keep a secret,”--Carl
leaned forward and touched her arm, smiling,--“I even think I liked
the old country better. This is all very splendid in its way,
but there was something about this country when it was a wild old
beast that has haunted me all these years. Now, when I come back
to all this milk and honey, I feel like the old German song, 'Wo
bist du, wo bist du, mein geliebtest Land ?'--Do you ever feel like
that, I wonder ?”

“Yes, sometimes, when I think about father and mother and those
who are gone; so many of our old neighbors.” Alexandra paused and
looked up thoughtfully at the stars. “We can remember the graveyard
when it was wild prairie, Carl, and now--”

“And now the old story has begun to write itself over there,” said
Carl softly. “Isn't it queer: there are only two or three human
stories, and they go on repeating themselves as fiercely as if they
had never happened before; like the larks in this country, that
have been singing the same five notes over for thousands of years.”

“Oh, yes! The young people, they live so hard. And yet I sometimes
envy them. There is my little neighbor, now; the people who bought
your old place. I wouldn't have sold it to any one else, but I
was always fond of that girl. You must remember her, little Marie
Tovesky, from Omaha, who used to visit here ? When she was eighteen
she ran away from the convent school and got married, crazy child!
She came out here a bride, with her father and husband. He had
nothing, and the old man was willing to buy them a place and set
them up. Your farm took her fancy, and I was glad to have her so
near me. I've never been sorry, either. I even try to get along
with Frank on her account.”

“Is Frank her husband ?”

“Yes. He's one of these wild fellows. Most Bohemians are
good-natured, but Frank thinks we don't appreciate him here, I
guess. He's jealous about everything, his farm and his horses and
his pretty wife. Everybody likes her, just the same as when she
was little. Sometimes I go up to the Catholic church with Emil,
and it's funny to see Marie standing there laughing and shaking
hands with people, looking so excited and gay, with Frank sulking
behind her as if he could eat everybody alive. Frank's not a bad
neighbor, but to get on with him you've got to make a fuss over
him and act as if you thought he was a very important person all
the time, and different from other people. I find it hard to keep
that up from one year's end to another.”

“I shouldn't think you'd be very successful at that kind of thing,
Alexandra.” Carl seemed to find the idea amusing.

“Well,” said Alexandra firmly, “I do the best I can, on Marie's
account. She has it hard enough, anyway. She's too young and
pretty for this sort of life. We're all ever so much older and
slower. But she's the kind that won't be downed easily. She'll
work all day and go to a Bohemian wedding and dance all night, and
drive the hay wagon for a cross man next morning. I could stay by
a job, but I never had the go in me that she has, when I was going
my best. I'll have to take you over to see her to-morrow.”

Carl dropped the end of his cigar softly among the castor beans and
sighed. “Yes, I suppose I must see the old place. I'm cowardly
about things that remind me of myself. It took courage to come
at all, Alexandra. I wouldn't have, if I hadn't wanted to see you
very, very much.”

Alexandra looked at him with her calm, deliberate eyes. “Why do
you dread things like that, Carl ?” she asked earnestly. “Why are
you dissatisfied with yourself ?”

Her visitor winced. “How direct you are, Alexandra! Just like
you used to be. Do I give myself away so quickly ? Well, you see,
for one thing, there's nothing to look forward to in my profession.
Wood-engraving is the only thing I care about, and that had gone out
before I began. Everything's cheap metal work nowadays, touching
up miserable photographs, forcing up poor drawings, and spoiling good
ones. I'm absolutely sick of it all.” Carl frowned. “Alexandra,
all the way out from New York I've been planning how I could
deceive you and make you think me a very enviable fellow, and here
I am telling you the truth the first night. I waste a lot of time
pretending to people, and the joke of it is, I don't think I ever
deceive any one. There are too many of my kind; people know us on
sight.”

Carl paused. Alexandra pushed her hair back from her brow with a
puzzled, thoughtful gesture. “You see,” he went on calmly, “measured
by your standards here, I'm a failure. I couldn't buy even one of
your cornfields. I've enjoyed a great many things, but I've got
nothing to show for it all.”

“But you show for it yourself, Carl. I'd rather have had your
freedom than my land.”

Carl shook his head mournfully. “Freedom so often means that one
isn't needed anywhere. Here you are an individual, you have a
background of your own, you would be missed. But off there in the
cities there are thousands of rolling stones like me. We are all
alike; we have no ties, we know nobody, we own nothing. When one
of us dies, they scarcely know where to bury him. Our landlady and
the delicatessen man are our mourners, and we leave nothing behind
us but a frock-coat and a fiddle, or an easel, or a typewriter, or
whatever tool we got our living by. All we have ever managed to
do is to pay our rent, the exorbitant rent that one has to pay for
a few square feet of space near the heart of things. We have no
house, no place, no people of our own. We live in the streets,
in the parks, in the theatres. We sit in restaurants and concert
halls and look about at the hundreds of our own kind and shudder.”

Alexandra was silent. She sat looking at the silver spot the moon
made on the surface of the pond down in the pasture. He knew that
she understood what he meant. At last she said slowly, “And yet I
would rather have Emil grow up like that than like his two brothers.
We pay a high rent, too, though we pay differently. We grow hard
and heavy here. We don't move lightly and easily as you do, and
our minds get stiff. If the world were no wider than my cornfields,
if there were not something beside this, I wouldn't feel that it
was much worth while to work. No, I would rather have Emil like
you than like them. I felt that as soon as you came.”

“I wonder why you feel like that ?” Carl mused.

“I don't know. Perhaps I am like Carrie Jensen, the sister of one
of my hired men. She had never been out of the cornfields, and a
few years ago she got despondent and said life was just the same
thing over and over, and she didn't see the use of it. After she
had tried to kill herself once or twice, her folks got worried and
sent her over to Iowa to visit some relations. Ever since she's
come back she's been perfectly cheerful, and she says she's contented
to live and work in a world that's so big and interesting. She
said that anything as big as the bridges over the Platte and the
Missouri reconciled her. And it's what goes on in the world that
reconciles me.”




V

Alexandra did not find time to go to her neighbor's the next day, nor
the next. It was a busy season on the farm, with the corn-plowing
going on, and even Emil was in the field with a team and cultivator.
Carl went about over the farms with Alexandra in the morning, and
in the afternoon and evening they found a great deal to talk about.
Emil, for all his track practice, did not stand up under farmwork
very well, and by night he was too tired to talk or even to practise
on his cornet.

On Wednesday morning Carl got up before it was light, and stole
downstairs and out of the kitchen door just as old Ivar was making
his morning ablutions at the pump. Carl nodded to him and hurried
up the draw, past the garden, and into the pasture where the milking
cows used to be kept.

The dawn in the east looked like the light from some great fire that
was burning under the edge of the world. The color was reflected
in the globules of dew that sheathed the short gray pasture grass.
Carl walked rapidly until he came to the crest of the second hill,
where the Bergson pasture joined the one that had belonged to his
father. There he sat down and waited for the sun to rise. It was
just there that he and Alexandra used to do their milking together, he
on his side of the fence, she on hers. He could remember exactly
how she looked when she came over the close-cropped grass, her
skirts pinned up, her head bare, a bright tin pail in either hand,
and the milky light of the early morning all about her. Even as
a boy he used to feel, when he saw her coming with her free step,
her upright head and calm shoulders, that she looked as if she had
walked straight out of the morning itself. Since then, when he had
happened to see the sun come up in the country or on the water, he
had often remembered the young Swedish girl and her milking pails.

Carl sat musing until the sun leaped above the prairie, and in the
grass about him all the small creatures of day began to tune their
tiny instruments. Birds and insects without number began to chirp,
to twitter, to snap and whistle, to make all manner of fresh shrill
noises. The pasture was flooded with light; every clump of ironweed
and snow-on-the-mountain threw a long shadow, and the golden light
seemed to be rippling through the curly grass like the tide racing
in.

He crossed the fence into the pasture that was now the Shabatas' and
continued his walk toward the pond. He had not gone far, however,
when he discovered that he was not the only person abroad. In the
draw below, his gun in his hands, was Emil, advancing cautiously,
with a young woman beside him. They were moving softly, keeping
close together, and Carl knew that they expected to find ducks on
the pond. At the moment when they came in sight of the bright spot
of water, he heard a whirr of wings and the ducks shot up into the
air. There was a sharp crack from the gun, and five of the birds
fell to the ground. Emil and his companion laughed delightedly,
and Emil ran to pick them up. When he came back, dangling the
ducks by their feet, Marie held her apron and he dropped them into
it. As she stood looking down at them, her face changed. She
took up one of the birds, a rumpled ball of feathers with the blood
dripping slowly from its mouth, and looked at the live color that
still burned on its plumage.

As she let it fall, she cried in distress, “Oh, Emil, why did you ?”

“I like that!” the boy exclaimed indignantly. “Why, Marie, you
asked me to come yourself.”

“Yes, yes, I know,” she said tearfully, “but I didn't think. I
hate to see them when they are first shot. They were having such
a good time, and we've spoiled it all for them.”

Emil gave a rather sore laugh. “I should say we had! I'm not going
hunting with you any more. You're as bad as Ivar. Here, let me
take them.” He snatched the ducks out of her apron.

“Don't be cross, Emil. Only--Ivar's right about wild things. They're
too happy to kill. You can tell just how they felt when they flew
up. They were scared, but they didn't really think anything could
hurt them. No, we won't do that any more.”

“All right,” Emil assented. “I'm sorry I made you feel bad.” As
he looked down into her tearful eyes, there was a curious, sharp
young bitterness in his own.

Carl watched them as they moved slowly down the draw. They had
not seen him at all. He had not overheard much of their dialogue,
but he felt the import of it. It made him, somehow, unreasonably
mournful to find two young things abroad in the pasture in the
early morning. He decided that he needed his breakfast.




VI

At dinner that day Alexandra said she thought they must really
manage to go over to the Shabatas' that afternoon. “It's not often
I let three days go by without seeing Marie. She will think I have
forsaken her, now that my old friend has come back.”

After the men had gone back to work, Alexandra put on a white dress
and her sun-hat, and she and Carl set forth across the fields.
“You see we have kept up the old path, Carl. It has been so nice
for me to feel that there was a friend at the other end of it
again.”

Carl smiled a little ruefully. “All the same, I hope it hasn't
been QUITE the same.”

Alexandra looked at him with surprise. “Why, no, of course not.
Not the same. She could not very well take your place, if that's
what you mean. I'm friendly with all my neighbors, I hope. But
Marie is really a companion, some one I can talk to quite frankly.
You wouldn't want me to be more lonely than I have been, would
you ?”

Carl laughed and pushed back the triangular lock of hair with the
edge of his hat. “Of course I don't. I ought to be thankful that
this path hasn't been worn by--well, by friends with more pressing
errands than your little Bohemian is likely to have.” He paused
to give Alexandra his hand as she stepped over the stile. “Are
you the least bit disappointed in our coming together again ?” he
asked abruptly. “Is it the way you hoped it would be ?”

Alexandra smiled at this. “Only better. When I've thought about
your coming, I've sometimes been a little afraid of it. You have
lived where things move so fast, and everything is slow here; the
people slowest of all. Our lives are like the years, all made up
of weather and crops and cows. How you hated cows!” She shook her
head and laughed to herself.

“I didn't when we milked together. I walked up to the pasture
corners this morning. I wonder whether I shall ever be able to
tell you all that I was thinking about up there. It's a strange
thing, Alexandra; I find it easy to be frank with you about everything
under the sun except--yourself!”

“You are afraid of hurting my feelings, perhaps.” Alexandra looked
at him thoughtfully.

“No, I'm afraid of giving you a shock. You've seen yourself for
so long in the dull minds of the people about you, that if I were
to tell you how you seem to me, it would startle you. But you must
see that you astonish me. You must feel when people admire you.”

Alexandra blushed and laughed with some confusion. “I felt that
you were pleased with me, if you mean that.”

“And you've felt when other people were pleased with you ?” he
insisted.

“Well, sometimes. The men in town, at the banks and the county
offices, seem glad to see me. I think, myself, it is more pleasant
to do business with people who are clean and healthy-looking,” she
admitted blandly.

Carl gave a little chuckle as he opened the Shabatas' gate for her.
“Oh, do you ?” he asked dryly.

There was no sign of life about the Shabatas' house except a big
yellow cat, sunning itself on the kitchen doorstep.

Alexandra took the path that led to the orchard. “She often sits
there and sews. I didn't telephone her we were coming, because I
didn't want her to go to work and bake cake and freeze ice-cream.
She'll always make a party if you give her the least excuse. Do
you recognize the apple trees, Carl ?”

Linstrum looked about him. “I wish I had a dollar for every bucket
of water I've carried for those trees. Poor father, he was an
easy man, but he was perfectly merciless when it came to watering
the orchard.”

“That's one thing I like about Germans; they make an orchard grow
if they can't make anything else. I'm so glad these trees belong
to some one who takes comfort in them. When I rented this place,
the tenants never kept the orchard up, and Emil and I used to come
over and take care of it ourselves. It needs mowing now. There
she is, down in the corner. Maria-a-a!” she called.

A recumbent figure started up from the grass and came running toward
them through the flickering screen of light and shade.

“Look at her! Isn't she like a little brown rabbit ?” Alexandra
laughed.

Maria ran up panting and threw her arms about Alexandra. “Oh, I
had begun to think you were not coming at all, maybe. I knew you
were so busy. Yes, Emil told me about Mr. Linstrum being here.
Won't you come up to the house ?”

“Why not sit down there in your corner ? Carl wants to see the
orchard. He kept all these trees alive for years, watering them
with his own back.”

Marie turned to Carl. “Then I'm thankful to you, Mr. Linstrum. We'd
never have bought the place if it hadn't been for this orchard, and
then I wouldn't have had Alexandra, either.” She gave Alexandra's
arm a little squeeze as she walked beside her. “How nice your dress
smells, Alexandra; you put rosemary leaves in your chest, like I
told you.”

She led them to the northwest corner of the orchard, sheltered on
one side by a thick mulberry hedge and bordered on the other by a
wheatfield, just beginning to yellow. In this corner the ground
dipped a little, and the blue-grass, which the weeds had driven out
in the upper part of the orchard, grew thick and luxuriant. Wild
roses were flaming in the tufts of bunchgrass along the fence.
Under a white mulberry tree there was an old wagon-seat. Beside
it lay a book and a workbasket.

“You must have the seat, Alexandra. The grass would stain your
dress,” the hostess insisted. She dropped down on the ground
at Alexandra's side and tucked her feet under her. Carl sat at
a little distance from the two women, his back to the wheatfield,
and watched them. Alexandra took off her shade-hat and threw it on
the ground. Marie picked it up and played with the white ribbons,
twisting them about her brown fingers as she talked. They made a
pretty picture in the strong sunlight, the leafy pattern surrounding
them like a net; the Swedish woman so white and gold, kindly and
amused, but armored in calm, and the alert brown one, her full lips
parted, points of yellow light dancing in her eyes as she laughed
and chattered. Carl had never forgotten little Marie Tovesky's
eyes, and he was glad to have an opportunity to study them. The
brown iris, he found, was curiously slashed with yellow, the color
of sunflower honey, or of old amber. In each eye one of these
streaks must have been larger than the others, for the effect was
that of two dancing points of light, two little yellow bubbles,
such as rise in a glass of champagne. Sometimes they seemed like
the sparks from a forge. She seemed so easily excited, to kindle
with a fierce little flame if one but breathed upon her. “What
a waste,” Carl reflected. “She ought to be doing all that for a
sweetheart. How awkwardly things come about!”

It was not very long before Marie sprang up out of the grass again.
“Wait a moment. I want to show you something.” She ran away and
disappeared behind the low-growing apple trees.

“What a charming creature,” Carl murmured. “I don't wonder that
her husband is jealous. But can't she walk ? does she always run ?”

Alexandra nodded. “Always. I don't see many people, but I don't
believe there are many like her, anywhere.”

Marie came back with a branch she had broken from an apricot tree,
laden with pale yellow, pink-cheeked fruit. She dropped it beside
Carl. “Did you plant those, too ? They are such beautiful little
trees.”

Carl fingered the blue-green leaves, porous like blotting-paper and
shaped like birch leaves, hung on waxen red stems. “Yes, I think
I did. Are these the circus trees, Alexandra ?”

“Shall I tell her about them ?” Alexandra asked. “Sit down like
a good girl, Marie, and don't ruin my poor hat, and I'll tell you
a story. A long time ago, when Carl and I were, say, sixteen and
twelve, a circus came to Hanover and we went to town in our wagon,
with Lou and Oscar, to see the parade. We hadn't money enough to
go to the circus. We followed the parade out to the circus grounds
and hung around until the show began and the crowd went inside the
tent. Then Lou was afraid we looked foolish standing outside in
the pasture, so we went back to Hanover feeling very sad. There
was a man in the streets selling apricots, and we had never seen
any before. He had driven down from somewhere up in the French
country, and he was selling them twenty-five cents a peck. We had
a little money our fathers had given us for candy, and I bought
two pecks and Carl bought one. They cheered us a good deal, and
we saved all the seeds and planted them. Up to the time Carl went
away, they hadn't borne at all.”

“And now he's come back to eat them,” cried Marie, nodding at Carl.
“That IS a good story. I can remember you a little, Mr. Linstrum.
I used to see you in Hanover sometimes, when Uncle Joe took me to
town. I remember you because you were always buying pencils and
tubes of paint at the drug store. Once, when my uncle left me at
the store, you drew a lot of little birds and flowers for me on a
piece of wrapping-paper. I kept them for a long while. I thought
you were very romantic because you could draw and had such black
eyes.”

Carl smiled. “Yes, I remember that time. Your uncle bought you
some kind of a mechanical toy, a Turkish lady sitting on an ottoman
and smoking a hookah, wasn't it ? And she turned her head backwards
and forwards.”

“Oh, yes! Wasn't she splendid! I knew well enough I ought not
to tell Uncle Joe I wanted it, for he had just come back from the
saloon and was feeling good. You remember how he laughed ? She
tickled him, too. But when we got home, my aunt scolded him for
buying toys when she needed so many things. We wound our lady up
every night, and when she began to move her head my aunt used to
laugh as hard as any of us. It was a music-box, you know, and the
Turkish lady played a tune while she smoked. That was how she made
you feel so jolly. As I remember her, she was lovely, and had a
gold crescent on her turban.”

Half an hour later, as they were leaving the house, Carl and Alexandra
were met in the path by a strapping fellow in overalls and a blue
shirt. He was breathing hard, as if he had been running, and was
muttering to himself.

Marie ran forward, and, taking him by the arm, gave him a little
push toward her guests. “Frank, this is Mr. Linstrum.”

Frank took off his broad straw hat and nodded to Alexandra. When
he spoke to Carl, he showed a fine set of white teeth. He was burned
a dull red down to his neckband, and there was a heavy three-days'
stubble on his face. Even in his agitation he was handsome, but
he looked a rash and violent man.

Barely saluting the callers, he turned at once to his wife and
began, in an outraged tone, “I have to leave my team to drive the
old woman Hiller's hogs out-a my wheat. I go to take dat old woman
to de court if she ain't careful, I tell you!”

His wife spoke soothingly. “But, Frank, she has only her lame boy
to help her. She does the best she can.”

Alexandra looked at the excited man and offered a suggestion. “Why
don't you go over there some afternoon and hog-tight her fences ?
You'd save time for yourself in the end.”

Frank's neck stiffened. “Not-a-much, I won't. I keep my hogs
home. Other peoples can do like me. See ? If that Louis can mend
shoes, he can mend fence.”

“Maybe,” said Alexandra placidly; “but I've found it sometimes pays
to mend other people's fences. Good-bye, Marie. Come to see me
soon.”

Alexandra walked firmly down the path and Carl followed her.

Frank went into the house and threw himself on the sofa, his face
to the wall, his clenched fist on his hip. Marie, having seen her
guests off, came in and put her hand coaxingly on his shoulder.

“Poor Frank! You've run until you've made your head ache, now
haven't you ? Let me make you some coffee.”

“What else am I to do ?” he cried hotly in Bohemian. “Am I to let
any old woman's hogs root up my wheat ? Is that what I work myself
to death for ?”

“Don't worry about it, Frank. I'll speak to Mrs. Hiller again.
But, really, she almost cried last time they got out, she was so
sorry.”

Frank bounced over on his other side. “That's it; you always side
with them against me. They all know it. Anybody here feels free
to borrow the mower and break it, or turn their hogs in on me.
They know you won't care!”

Marie hurried away to make his coffee. When she came back, he was
fast asleep. She sat down and looked at him for a long while, very
thoughtfully. When the kitchen clock struck six she went out to
get supper, closing the door gently behind her. She was always
sorry for Frank when he worked himself into one of these rages, and
she was sorry to have him rough and quarrelsome with his neighbors.
She was perfectly aware that the neighbors had a good deal to put
up with, and that they bore with Frank for her sake.




VII

Marie's father, Albert Tovesky, was one of the more intelligent
Bohemians who came West in the early seventies. He settled in Omaha
and became a leader and adviser among his people there. Marie was
his youngest child, by a second wife, and was the apple of his eye.
She was barely sixteen, and was in the graduating class of the
Omaha High School, when Frank Shabata arrived from the old country
and set all the Bohemian girls in a flutter. He was easily the
buck of the beer-gardens, and on Sunday he was a sight to see, with
his silk hat and tucked shirt and blue frock-coat, wearing gloves
and carrying a little wisp of a yellow cane. He was tall and fair,
with splendid teeth and close-cropped yellow curls, and he wore a
slightly disdainful expression, proper for a young man with high
connections, whose mother had a big farm in the Elbe valley. There
was often an interesting discontent in his blue eyes, and every
Bohemian girl he met imagined herself the cause of that unsatisfied
expression. He had a way of drawing out his cambric handkerchief
slowly, by one corner, from his breast-pocket, that was melancholy
and romantic in the extreme. He took a little flight with each
of the more eligible Bohemian girls, but it was when he was with
little Marie Tovesky that he drew his handkerchief out most slowly,
and, after he had lit a fresh cigar, dropped the match most
despairingly. Any one could see, with half an eye, that his proud
heart was bleeding for somebody.

One Sunday, late in the summer after Marie's graduation, she met
Frank at a Bohemian picnic down the river and went rowing with him
all the afternoon. When she got home that evening she went straight
to her father's room and told him that she was engaged to Shabata.
Old Tovesky was having a comfortable pipe before he went to bed.
When he heard his daughter's announcement, he first prudently
corked his beer bottle and then leaped to his feet and had a turn
of temper. He characterized Frank Shabata by a Bohemian expression
which is the equivalent of stuffed shirt.

“Why don't he go to work like the rest of us did ? His farm in the
Elbe valley, indeed! Ain't he got plenty brothers and sisters ?
It's his mother's farm, and why don't he stay at home and help her ?
Haven't I seen his mother out in the morning at five o'clock with
her ladle and her big bucket on wheels, putting liquid manure on
the cabbages ? Don't I know the look of old Eva Shabata's hands ?
Like an old horse's hoofs they are--and this fellow wearing gloves
and rings! Engaged, indeed! You aren't fit to be out of school,
and that's what's the matter with you. I will send you off to the
Sisters of the Sacred Heart in St. Louis, and they will teach you
some sense, _I_ guess!”

Accordingly, the very next week, Albert Tovesky took his daughter,
pale and tearful, down the river to the convent. But the way to
make Frank want anything was to tell him he couldn't have it. He
managed to have an interview with Marie before she went away,
and whereas he had been only half in love with her before, he now
persuaded himself that he would not stop at anything. Marie took
with her to the convent, under the canvas lining of her trunk, the
results of a laborious and satisfying morning on Frank's part; no
less than a dozen photographs of himself, taken in a dozen different
love-lorn attitudes. There was a little round photograph for her
watch-case, photographs for her wall and dresser, and even long
narrow ones to be used as bookmarks. More than once the handsome
gentleman was torn to pieces before the French class by an indignant
nun.

Marie pined in the convent for a year, until her eighteenth birthday
was passed. Then she met Frank Shabata in the Union Station in
St. Louis and ran away with him. Old Tovesky forgave his daughter
because there was nothing else to do, and bought her a farm in
the country that she had loved so well as a child. Since then her
story had been a part of the history of the Divide. She and Frank
had been living there for five years when Carl Linstrum came back
to pay his long deferred visit to Alexandra. Frank had, on the
whole, done better than one might have expected. He had flung
himself at the soil with savage energy. Once a year he went to
Hastings or to Omaha, on a spree. He stayed away for a week or
two, and then came home and worked like a demon. He did work; if
he felt sorry for himself, that was his own affair.




VIII

On the evening of the day of Alexandra's call at the Shabatas',
a heavy rain set in. Frank sat up until a late hour reading the
Sunday newspapers. One of the Goulds was getting a divorce, and
Frank took it as a personal affront. In printing the story of the
young man's marital troubles, the knowing editor gave a sufficiently
colored account of his career, stating the amount of his income
and the manner in which he was supposed to spend it. Frank read
English slowly, and the more he read about this divorce case, the
angrier he grew. At last he threw down the page with a snort. He
turned to his farm-hand who was reading the other half of the paper.

“By God! if I have that young feller in de hayfield once, I show
him someting. Listen here what he do wit his money.” And Frank
began the catalogue of the young man's reputed extravagances.

Marie sighed. She thought it hard that the Goulds, for whom she
had nothing but good will, should make her so much trouble. She
hated to see the Sunday newspapers come into the house. Frank was
always reading about the doings of rich people and feeling outraged.
He had an inexhaustible stock of stories about their crimes and
follies, how they bribed the courts and shot down their butlers
with impunity whenever they chose. Frank and Lou Bergson had very
similar ideas, and they were two of the political agitators of the
county.

The next morning broke clear and brilliant, but Frank said the
ground was too wet to plough, so he took the cart and drove over to
Sainte-Agnes to spend the day at Moses Marcel's saloon. After he
was gone, Marie went out to the back porch to begin her butter-making.
A brisk wind had come up and was driving puffy white clouds across
the sky. The orchard was sparkling and rippling in the sun. Marie
stood looking toward it wistfully, her hand on the lid of the
churn, when she heard a sharp ring in the air, the merry sound of
the whetstone on the scythe. That invitation decided her. She ran
into the house, put on a short skirt and a pair of her husband's
boots, caught up a tin pail and started for the orchard. Emil
had already begun work and was mowing vigorously. When he saw her
coming, he stopped and wiped his brow. His yellow canvas leggings
and khaki trousers were splashed to the knees.

“Don't let me disturb you, Emil. I'm going to pick cherries.
Isn't everything beautiful after the rain ? Oh, but I'm glad to get
this place mowed! When I heard it raining in the night, I thought
maybe you would come and do it for me to-day. The wind wakened
me. Didn't it blow dreadfully ? Just smell the wild roses! They
are always so spicy after a rain. We never had so many of them
in here before. I suppose it's the wet season. Will you have to
cut them, too ?”

“If I cut the grass, I will,” Emil said teasingly. “What's the
matter with you ? What makes you so flighty ?”

“Am I flighty ? I suppose that's the wet season, too, then. It's
exciting to see everything growing so fast,--and to get the grass
cut! Please leave the roses till last, if you must cut them. Oh,
I don't mean all of them, I mean that low place down by my tree, where
there are so many. Aren't you splashed! Look at the spider-webs
all over the grass. Good-bye. I'll call you if I see a snake.”

She tripped away and Emil stood looking after her. In a few moments
he heard the cherries dropping smartly into the pail, and he began
to swing his scythe with that long, even stroke that few American
boys ever learn. Marie picked cherries and sang softly to herself,
stripping one glittering branch after another, shivering when she
caught a shower of raindrops on her neck and hair. And Emil mowed
his way slowly down toward the cherry trees.

That summer the rains had been so many and opportune that it was
almost more than Shabata and his man could do to keep up with the
corn; the orchard was a neglected wilderness. All sorts of weeds and
herbs and flowers had grown up there; splotches of wild larkspur,
pale green-and-white spikes of hoarhound, plantations of wild
cotton, tangles of foxtail and wild wheat. South of the apricot
trees, cornering on the wheatfield, was Frank's alfalfa, where
myriads of white and yellow butterflies were always fluttering
above the purple blossoms. When Emil reached the lower corner by
the hedge, Marie was sitting under her white mulberry tree, the
pailful of cherries beside her, looking off at the gentle, tireless
swelling of the wheat.

“Emil,” she said suddenly--he was mowing quietly about under the
tree so as not to disturb her--“what religion did the Swedes have
away back, before they were Christians ?”

Emil paused and straightened his back. “I don't know. About like
the Germans', wasn't it ?”

Marie went on as if she had not heard him. “The Bohemians, you
know, were tree worshipers before the missionaries came. Father says
the people in the mountains still do queer things, sometimes,--they
believe that trees bring good or bad luck.”

Emil looked superior. “Do they ? Well, which are the lucky trees ?
I'd like to know.”

“I don't know all of them, but I know lindens are. The old people
in the mountains plant lindens to purify the forest, and to do away
with the spells that come from the old trees they say have lasted
from heathen times. I'm a good Catholic, but I think I could get
along with caring for trees, if I hadn't anything else.”

“That's a poor saying,” said Emil, stooping over to wipe his hands
in the wet grass.

“Why is it ? If I feel that way, I feel that way. I like trees
because they seem more resigned to the way they have to live than
other things do. I feel as if this tree knows everything I ever
think of when I sit here. When I come back to it, I never have to
remind it of anything; I begin just where I left off.”

Emil had nothing to say to this. He reached up among the branches
and began to pick the sweet, insipid fruit,--long ivory-colored
berries, tipped with faint pink, like white coral, that fall to
the ground unheeded all summer through. He dropped a handful into
her lap.

“Do you like Mr. Linstrum ?” Marie asked suddenly.

“Yes. Don't you ?”

“Oh, ever so much; only he seems kind of staid and school-teachery.
But, of course, he is older than Frank, even. I'm sure I don't
want to live to be more than thirty, do you ? Do you think Alexandra
likes him very much ?”

“I suppose so. They were old friends.”

“Oh, Emil, you know what I mean!” Marie tossed her head impatiently.
“Does she really care about him ? When she used to tell me about
him, I always wondered whether she wasn't a little in love with
him.”

“Who, Alexandra ?” Emil laughed and thrust his hands into his
trousers pockets. “Alexandra's never been in love, you crazy!” He
laughed again. “She wouldn't know how to go about it. The idea!”

Marie shrugged her shoulders. “Oh, you don't know Alexandra as well
as you think you do! If you had any eyes, you would see that she
is very fond of him. It would serve you all right if she walked
off with Carl. I like him because he appreciates her more than
you do.”

Emil frowned. “What are you talking about, Marie ? Alexandra's
all right. She and I have always been good friends. What more do
you want ? I like to talk to Carl about New York and what a fellow
can do there.”

“Oh, Emil! Surely you are not thinking of going off there ?”

“Why not ? I must go somewhere, mustn't I ?” The young man took up
his scythe and leaned on it. “Would you rather I went off in the
sand hills and lived like Ivar ?”

Marie's face fell under his brooding gaze. She looked down at his
wet leggings. “I'm sure Alexandra hopes you will stay on here,”
 she murmured.

“Then Alexandra will be disappointed,” the young man said roughly.
“What do I want to hang around here for ? Alexandra can run the
farm all right, without me. I don't want to stand around and look
on. I want to be doing something on my own account.”

“That's so,” Marie sighed. “There are so many, many things you
can do. Almost anything you choose.”

“And there are so many, many things I can't do.” Emil echoed her
tone sarcastically. “Sometimes I don't want to do anything at
all, and sometimes I want to pull the four corners of the Divide
together,”--he threw out his arm and brought it back with a jerk,--“so,
like a table-cloth. I get tired of seeing men and horses going up
and down, up and down.”

Marie looked up at his defiant figure and her face clouded. “I wish
you weren't so restless, and didn't get so worked up over things,”
 she said sadly.

“Thank you,” he returned shortly.

She sighed despondently. “Everything I say makes you cross, don't
it ? And you never used to be cross to me.”

Emil took a step nearer and stood frowning down at her bent head.
He stood in an attitude of self-defense, his feet well apart, his
hands clenched and drawn up at his sides, so that the cords stood
out on his bare arms. “I can't play with you like a little boy
any more,” he said slowly. “That's what you miss, Marie. You'll
have to get some other little boy to play with.” He stopped and took
a deep breath. Then he went on in a low tone, so intense that it
was almost threatening: “Sometimes you seem to understand perfectly,
and then sometimes you pretend you don't. You don't help things
any by pretending. It's then that I want to pull the corners of
the Divide together. If you WON'T understand, you know, I could
make you!”

Marie clasped her hands and started up from her seat. She had grown
very pale and her eyes were shining with excitement and distress.
“But, Emil, if I understand, then all our good times are over, we
can never do nice things together any more. We shall have to behave
like Mr. Linstrum. And, anyhow, there's nothing to understand!”
 She struck the ground with her little foot fiercely. “That won't
last. It will go away, and things will be just as they used to.
I wish you were a Catholic. The Church helps people, indeed it
does. I pray for you, but that's not the same as if you prayed
yourself.”

She spoke rapidly and pleadingly, looked entreatingly into his
face. Emil stood defiant, gazing down at her.

“I can't pray to have the things I want,” he said slowly, “and I
won't pray not to have them, not if I'm damned for it.”

Marie turned away, wringing her hands. “Oh, Emil, you won't try!
Then all our good times are over.”

“Yes; over. I never expect to have any more.”

Emil gripped the hand-holds of his scythe and began to mow. Marie
took up her cherries and went slowly toward the house, crying
bitterly.




IX

On Sunday afternoon, a month after Carl Linstrum's arrival, he rode
with Emil up into the French country to attend a Catholic fair. He
sat for most of the afternoon in the basement of the church, where
the fair was held, talking to Marie Shabata, or strolled about the
gravel terrace, thrown up on the hillside in front of the basement
doors, where the French boys were jumping and wrestling and throwing
the discus. Some of the boys were in their white baseball suits;
they had just come up from a Sunday practice game down in the
ballgrounds. Amedee, the newly married, Emil's best friend, was
their pitcher, renowned among the country towns for his dash and
skill. Amedee was a little fellow, a year younger than Emil and
much more boyish in appearance; very lithe and active and neatly
made, with a clear brown and white skin, and flashing white teeth.
The Sainte-Agnes boys were to play the Hastings nine in a fortnight,
and Amedee's lightning balls were the hope of his team. The little
Frenchman seemed to get every ounce there was in him behind the
ball as it left his hand.

“You'd have made the battery at the University for sure, 'Medee,”
 Emil said as they were walking from the ball-grounds back to the
church on the hill. “You're pitching better than you did in the
spring.”

Amedee grinned. “Sure! A married man don't lose his head no more.”
 He slapped Emil on the back as he caught step with him. “Oh, Emil,
you wanna get married right off quick! It's the greatest thing
ever!”

Emil laughed. “How am I going to get married without any girl ?”

Amedee took his arm. “Pooh! There are plenty girls will have
you. You wanna get some nice French girl, now. She treat you well;
always be jolly. See,”--he began checking off on his fingers,--“there
is Severine, and Alphosen, and Josephine, and Hectorine, and Louise,
and Malvina--why, I could love any of them girls! Why don't you
get after them ? Are you stuck up, Emil, or is anything the matter
with you ? I never did know a boy twenty-two years old before that
didn't have no girl. You wanna be a priest, maybe ? Not-a for me!”
 Amedee swaggered. “I bring many good Catholics into this world,
I hope, and that's a way I help the Church.”

Emil looked down and patted him on the shoulder. “Now you're windy,
'Medee. You Frenchies like to brag.”

But Amedee had the zeal of the newly married, and he was not
to be lightly shaken off. “Honest and true, Emil, don't you want
ANY girl ? Maybe there's some young lady in Lincoln, now, very
grand,”--Amedee waved his hand languidly before his face to denote
the fan of heartless beauty,--“and you lost your heart up there.
Is that it ?”

“Maybe,” said Emil.

But Amedee saw no appropriate glow in his friend's face. “Bah!”
 he exclaimed in disgust. “I tell all the French girls to keep 'way
from you. You gotta rock in there,” thumping Emil on the ribs.

When they reached the terrace at the side of the church, Amedee,
who was excited by his success on the ball-grounds, challenged
Emil to a jumping-match, though he knew he would be beaten. They
belted themselves up, and Raoul Marcel, the choir tenor and Father
Duchesne's pet, and Jean Bordelau, held the string over which they
vaulted. All the French boys stood round, cheering and humping
themselves up when Emil or Amedee went over the wire, as if they
were helping in the lift. Emil stopped at five-feet-five, declaring
that he would spoil his appetite for supper if he jumped any more.

Angelique, Amedee's pretty bride, as blonde and fair as her name,
who had come out to watch the match, tossed her head at Emil and
said:--

“'Medee could jump much higher than you if he were as tall. And
anyhow, he is much more graceful. He goes over like a bird, and
you have to hump yourself all up.”

“Oh, I do, do I ?” Emil caught her and kissed her saucy mouth squarely,
while she laughed and struggled and called, “'Medee! 'Medee!”

“There, you see your 'Medee isn't even big enough to get you away
from me. I could run away with you right now and he could only
sit down and cry about it. I'll show you whether I have to hump
myself!” Laughing and panting, he picked Angelique up in his arms
and began running about the rectangle with her. Not until he saw
Marie Shabata's tiger eyes flashing from the gloom of the basement
doorway did he hand the disheveled bride over to her husband.
“There, go to your graceful; I haven't the heart to take you away
from him.”

Angelique clung to her husband and made faces at Emil over the
white shoulder of Amedee's ball-shirt. Emil was greatly amused at
her air of proprietorship and at Amedee's shameless submission to
it. He was delighted with his friend's good fortune. He liked to
see and to think about Amedee's sunny, natural, happy love.

He and Amedee had ridden and wrestled and larked together since
they were lads of twelve. On Sundays and holidays they were always
arm in arm. It seemed strange that now he should have to hide the
thing that Amedee was so proud of, that the feeling which gave one
of them such happiness should bring the other such despair. It
was like that when Alexandra tested her seed-corn in the spring,
he mused. From two ears that had grown side by side, the grains
of one shot up joyfully into the light, projecting themselves into
the future, and the grains from the other lay still in the earth
and rotted; and nobody knew why.




X

While Emil and Carl were amusing themselves at the fair, Alexandra
was at home, busy with her account-books, which had been neglected
of late. She was almost through with her figures when she heard
a cart drive up to the gate, and looking out of the window she saw
her two older brothers. They had seemed to avoid her ever since
Carl Linstrum's arrival, four weeks ago that day, and she hurried
to the door to welcome them. She saw at once that they had come
with some very definite purpose. They followed her stiffly into
the sitting-room. Oscar sat down, but Lou walked over to the window
and remained standing, his hands behind him.

“You are by yourself ?” he asked, looking toward the doorway into
the parlor.

“Yes. Carl and Emil went up to the Catholic fair.”

For a few moments neither of the men spoke.

Then Lou came out sharply. “How soon does he intend to go away
from here ?”

“I don't know, Lou. Not for some time, I hope.” Alexandra spoke
in an even, quiet tone that often exasperated her brothers. They
felt that she was trying to be superior with them.

Oscar spoke up grimly. “We thought we ought to tell you that people
have begun to talk,” he said meaningly.

Alexandra looked at him. “What about ?”

Oscar met her eyes blankly. “About you, keeping him here so long.
It looks bad for him to be hanging on to a woman this way. People
think you're getting taken in.”

Alexandra shut her account-book firmly. “Boys,” she said seriously,
“don't let's go on with this. We won't come out anywhere. I can't
take advice on such a matter. I know you mean well, but you must
not feel responsible for me in things of this sort. If we go on
with this talk it will only make hard feeling.”

Lou whipped about from the window. “You ought to think a little
about your family. You're making us all ridiculous.”

“How am I ?”

“People are beginning to say you want to marry the fellow.”

“Well, and what is ridiculous about that ?”

Lou and Oscar exchanged outraged looks. “Alexandra! Can't you
see he's just a tramp and he's after your money ? He wants to be
taken care of, he does!”

“Well, suppose I want to take care of him ? Whose business is it
but my own ?”

“Don't you know he'd get hold of your property ?”

“He'd get hold of what I wished to give him, certainly.”

Oscar sat up suddenly and Lou clutched at his bristly hair.

“Give him ?” Lou shouted. “Our property, our homestead ?”

“I don't know about the homestead,” said Alexandra quietly. “I
know you and Oscar have always expected that it would be left to
your children, and I'm not sure but what you're right. But I'll
do exactly as I please with the rest of my land, boys.”

“The rest of your land!” cried Lou, growing more excited every
minute. “Didn't all the land come out of the homestead ? It was
bought with money borrowed on the homestead, and Oscar and me worked
ourselves to the bone paying interest on it.”

“Yes, you paid the interest. But when you married we made a division
of the land, and you were satisfied. I've made more on my farms
since I've been alone than when we all worked together.”

“Everything you've made has come out of the original land that us
boys worked for, hasn't it ? The farms and all that comes out of
them belongs to us as a family.”

Alexandra waved her hand impatiently. “Come now, Lou. Stick to
the facts. You are talking nonsense. Go to the county clerk and
ask him who owns my land, and whether my titles are good.”

Lou turned to his brother. “This is what comes of letting a woman
meddle in business,” he said bitterly. “We ought to have taken
things in our own hands years ago. But she liked to run things,
and we humored her. We thought you had good sense, Alexandra. We
never thought you'd do anything foolish.”

Alexandra rapped impatiently on her desk with her knuckles.
“Listen, Lou. Don't talk wild. You say you ought to have taken
things into your own hands years ago. I suppose you mean before
you left home. But how could you take hold of what wasn't there ?
I've got most of what I have now since we divided the property;
I've built it up myself, and it has nothing to do with you.”

Oscar spoke up solemnly. “The property of a family really belongs
to the men of the family, no matter about the title. If anything
goes wrong, it's the men that are held responsible.”

“Yes, of course,” Lou broke in. “Everybody knows that. Oscar and
me have always been easy-going and we've never made any fuss. We
were willing you should hold the land and have the good of it, but
you got no right to part with any of it. We worked in the fields
to pay for the first land you bought, and whatever's come out of
it has got to be kept in the family.”

Oscar reinforced his brother, his mind fixed on the one point he
could see. “The property of a family belongs to the men of the
family, because they are held responsible, and because they do the
work.”

Alexandra looked from one to the other, her eyes full of indignation.
She had been impatient before, but now she was beginning to feel
angry. “And what about my work ?” she asked in an unsteady voice.

Lou looked at the carpet. “Oh, now, Alexandra, you always took
it pretty easy! Of course we wanted you to. You liked to manage
round, and we always humored you. We realize you were a great
deal of help to us. There's no woman anywhere around that knows
as much about business as you do, and we've always been proud of
that, and thought you were pretty smart. But, of course, the real
work always fell on us. Good advice is all right, but it don't
get the weeds out of the corn.”

“Maybe not, but it sometimes puts in the crop, and it sometimes
keeps the fields for corn to grow in,” said Alexandra dryly. “Why,
Lou, I can remember when you and Oscar wanted to sell this homestead
and all the improvements to old preacher Ericson for two thousand
dollars. If I'd consented, you'd have gone down to the river and
scraped along on poor farms for the rest of your lives. When I put
in our first field of alfalfa you both opposed me, just because I
first heard about it from a young man who had been to the University.
You said I was being taken in then, and all the neighbors said
so. You know as well as I do that alfalfa has been the salvation
of this country. You all laughed at me when I said our land here
was about ready for wheat, and I had to raise three big wheat crops
before the neighbors quit putting all their land in corn. Why, I
remember you cried, Lou, when we put in the first big wheat-planting,
and said everybody was laughing at us.”

Lou turned to Oscar. “That's the woman of it; if she tells you to
put in a crop, she thinks she's put it in. It makes women conceited
to meddle in business. I shouldn't think you'd want to remind us
how hard you were on us, Alexandra, after the way you baby Emil.”

“Hard on you ? I never meant to be hard. Conditions were hard.
Maybe I would never have been very soft, anyhow; but I certainly
didn't choose to be the kind of girl I was. If you take even a
vine and cut it back again and again, it grows hard, like a tree.”

Lou felt that they were wandering from the point, and that
in digression Alexandra might unnerve him. He wiped his forehead
with a jerk of his handkerchief. “We never doubted you, Alexandra.
We never questioned anything you did. You've always had your own
way. But you can't expect us to sit like stumps and see you done
out of the property by any loafer who happens along, and making
yourself ridiculous into the bargain.”

Oscar rose. “Yes,” he broke in, “everybody's laughing to see you
get took in; at your age, too. Everybody knows he's nearly five
years younger than you, and is after your money. Why, Alexandra,
you are forty years old!”

“All that doesn't concern anybody but Carl and me. Go to town and
ask your lawyers what you can do to restrain me from disposing of
my own property. And I advise you to do what they tell you; for
the authority you can exert by law is the only influence you will
ever have over me again.” Alexandra rose. “I think I would rather
not have lived to find out what I have to-day,” she said quietly,
closing her desk.

Lou and Oscar looked at each other questioningly. There seemed to
be nothing to do but to go, and they walked out.

“You can't do business with women,” Oscar said heavily as he
clambered into the cart. “But anyhow, we've had our say, at last.”

Lou scratched his head. “Talk of that kind might come too high, you
know; but she's apt to be sensible. You hadn't ought to said that
about her age, though, Oscar. I'm afraid that hurt her feelings;
and the worst thing we can do is to make her sore at us. She'd
marry him out of contrariness.”

“I only meant,” said Oscar, “that she is old enough to know better,
and she is. If she was going to marry, she ought to done it long
ago, and not go making a fool of herself now.”

Lou looked anxious, nevertheless. “Of course,” he reflected hopefully
and inconsistently, “Alexandra ain't much like other women-folks.
Maybe it won't make her sore. Maybe she'd as soon be forty as
not!”




XI

Emil came home at about half-past seven o'clock that evening. Old
Ivar met him at the windmill and took his horse, and the young
man went directly into the house. He called to his sister and she
answered from her bedroom, behind the sitting-room, saying that
she was lying down.

Emil went to her door.

“Can I see you for a minute ?” he asked. “I want to talk to you
about something before Carl comes.”

Alexandra rose quickly and came to the door. “Where is Carl ?”

“Lou and Oscar met us and said they wanted to talk to him, so he
rode over to Oscar's with them. Are you coming out ?” Emil asked
impatiently.

“Yes, sit down. I'll be dressed in a moment.”

Alexandra closed her door, and Emil sank down on the old slat lounge
and sat with his head in his hands. When his sister came out, he
looked up, not knowing whether the interval had been short or long,
and he was surprised to see that the room had grown quite dark.
That was just as well; it would be easier to talk if he were not
under the gaze of those clear, deliberate eyes, that saw so far in
some directions and were so blind in others. Alexandra, too, was
glad of the dusk. Her face was swollen from crying.

Emil started up and then sat down again. “Alexandra,” he said
slowly, in his deep young baritone, “I don't want to go away to
law school this fall. Let me put it off another year. I want to
take a year off and look around. It's awfully easy to rush into
a profession you don't really like, and awfully hard to get out of
it. Linstrum and I have been talking about that.”

“Very well, Emil. Only don't go off looking for land.” She came
up and put her hand on his shoulder. “I've been wishing you could
stay with me this winter.”

“That's just what I don't want to do, Alexandra. I'm restless.
I want to go to a new place. I want to go down to the City of
Mexico to join one of the University fellows who's at the head of
an electrical plant. He wrote me he could give me a little job,
enough to pay my way, and I could look around and see what I want
to do. I want to go as soon as harvest is over. I guess Lou and
Oscar will be sore about it.”

“I suppose they will.” Alexandra sat down on the lounge beside
him. “They are very angry with me, Emil. We have had a quarrel.
They will not come here again.”

Emil scarcely heard what she was saying; he did not notice the
sadness of her tone. He was thinking about the reckless life he
meant to live in Mexico.

“What about ?” he asked absently.

“About Carl Linstrum. They are afraid I am going to marry him,
and that some of my property will get away from them.”

Emil shrugged his shoulders. “What nonsense!” he murmured. “Just
like them.”

Alexandra drew back. “Why nonsense, Emil ?”

“Why, you've never thought of such a thing, have you ? They always
have to have something to fuss about.”

“Emil,” said his sister slowly, “you ought not to take things for
granted. Do you agree with them that I have no right to change my
way of living ?”

Emil looked at the outline of his sister's head in the dim light.
They were sitting close together and he somehow felt that she
could hear his thoughts. He was silent for a moment, and then said
in an embarrassed tone, “Why, no, certainly not. You ought to do
whatever you want to. I'll always back you.”

“But it would seem a little bit ridiculous to you if I married
Carl ?”

Emil fidgeted. The issue seemed to him too far-fetched to warrant
discussion. “Why, no. I should be surprised if you wanted to. I
can't see exactly why. But that's none of my business. You ought
to do as you please. Certainly you ought not to pay any attention
to what the boys say.”

Alexandra sighed. “I had hoped you might understand, a little,
why I do want to. But I suppose that's too much to expect. I've
had a pretty lonely life, Emil. Besides Marie, Carl is the only
friend I have ever had.”

Emil was awake now; a name in her last sentence roused him. He
put out his hand and took his sister's awkwardly. “You ought to
do just as you wish, and I think Carl's a fine fellow. He and I
would always get on. I don't believe any of the things the boys
say about him, honest I don't. They are suspicious of him because
he's intelligent. You know their way. They've been sore at me
ever since you let me go away to college. They're always trying to
catch me up. If I were you, I wouldn't pay any attention to them.
There's nothing to get upset about. Carl's a sensible fellow. He
won't mind them.”

“I don't know. If they talk to him the way they did to me, I think
he'll go away.”

Emil grew more and more uneasy. “Think so ? Well, Marie said it
would serve us all right if you walked off with him.”

“Did she ? Bless her little heart! SHE would.” Alexandra's voice
broke.

Emil began unlacing his leggings. “Why don't you talk to her about
it ? There's Carl, I hear his horse. I guess I'll go upstairs and
get my boots off. No, I don't want any supper. We had supper at
five o'clock, at the fair.”

Emil was glad to escape and get to his own room. He was a little
ashamed for his sister, though he had tried not to show it. He
felt that there was something indecorous in her proposal, and she
did seem to him somewhat ridiculous. There was trouble enough in
the world, he reflected, as he threw himself upon his bed, without
people who were forty years old imagining they wanted to get
married. In the darkness and silence Emil was not likely to think
long about Alexandra. Every image slipped away but one. He had
seen Marie in the crowd that afternoon. She sold candy at the
fair. WHY had she ever run away with Frank Shabata, and how could
she go on laughing and working and taking an interest in things ?
Why did she like so many people, and why had she seemed pleased when
all the French and Bohemian boys, and the priest himself, crowded
round her candy stand ? Why did she care about any one but him ? Why
could he never, never find the thing he looked for in her playful,
affectionate eyes ?

Then he fell to imagining that he looked once more and found it
there, and what it would be like if she loved him,--she who, as
Alexandra said, could give her whole heart. In that dream he could
lie for hours, as if in a trance. His spirit went out of his body
and crossed the fields to Marie Shabata.

At the University dances the girls had often looked wonderingly
at the tall young Swede with the fine head, leaning against the
wall and frowning, his arms folded, his eyes fixed on the ceiling
or the floor. All the girls were a little afraid of him. He was
distinguished-looking, and not the jollying kind. They felt that
he was too intense and preoccupied. There was something queer about
him. Emil's fraternity rather prided itself upon its dances, and
sometimes he did his duty and danced every dance. But whether he
was on the floor or brooding in a corner, he was always thinking
about Marie Shabata. For two years the storm had been gathering
in him.




XII

Carl came into the sitting-room while Alexandra was lighting the
lamp. She looked up at him as she adjusted the shade. His sharp
shoulders stooped as if he were very tired, his face was pale,
and there were bluish shadows under his dark eyes. His anger had
burned itself out and left him sick and disgusted.

“You have seen Lou and Oscar ?” Alexandra asked.

“Yes.” His eyes avoided hers.

Alexandra took a deep breath. “And now you are going away. I
thought so.”

Carl threw himself into a chair and pushed the dark lock back
from his forehead with his white, nervous hand. “What a hopeless
position you are in, Alexandra!” he exclaimed feverishly. “It is
your fate to be always surrounded by little men. And I am no better
than the rest. I am too little to face the criticism of even such
men as Lou and Oscar. Yes, I am going away; to-morrow. I cannot
even ask you to give me a promise until I have something to offer
you. I thought, perhaps, I could do that; but I find I can't.”

“What good comes of offering people things they don't need ?”
 Alexandra asked sadly. “I don't need money. But I have needed
you for a great many years. I wonder why I have been permitted to
prosper, if it is only to take my friends away from me.”

“I don't deceive myself,” Carl said frankly. “I know that I am
going away on my own account. I must make the usual effort. I
must have something to show for myself. To take what you would
give me, I should have to be either a very large man or a very
small one, and I am only in the middle class.”

Alexandra sighed. “I have a feeling that if you go away, you will
not come back. Something will happen to one of us, or to both.
People have to snatch at happiness when they can, in this world.
It is always easier to lose than to find. What I have is yours,
if you care enough about me to take it.”

Carl rose and looked up at the picture of John Bergson. “But I
can't, my dear, I can't! I will go North at once. Instead of idling
about in California all winter, I shall be getting my bearings up
there. I won't waste another week. Be patient with me, Alexandra.
Give me a year!”

“As you will,” said Alexandra wearily. “All at once, in a single
day, I lose everything; and I do not know why. Emil, too, is going
away.” Carl was still studying John Bergson's face and Alexandra's
eyes followed his. “Yes,” she said, “if he could have seen all
that would come of the task he gave me, he would have been sorry.
I hope he does not see me now. I hope that he is among the old
people of his blood and country, and that tidings do not reach him
from the New World.”




PART III. Winter Memories




I

Winter has settled down over the Divide again; the season in
which Nature recuperates, in which she sinks to sleep between the
fruitfulness of autumn and the passion of spring. The birds have
gone. The teeming life that goes on down in the long grass is
exterminated. The prairie-dog keeps his hole. The rabbits run
shivering from one frozen garden patch to another and are hard put
to it to find frost-bitten cabbage-stalks. At night the coyotes
roam the wintry waste, howling for food. The variegated fields
are all one color now; the pastures, the stubble, the roads, the
sky are the same leaden gray. The hedgerows and trees are scarcely
perceptible against the bare earth, whose slaty hue they have taken
on. The ground is frozen so hard that it bruises the foot to walk
in the roads or in the ploughed fields. It is like an iron country,
and the spirit is oppressed by its rigor and melancholy. One could
easily believe that in that dead landscape the germs of life and
fruitfulness were extinct forever.

Alexandra has settled back into her old routine. There are weekly
letters from Emil. Lou and Oscar she has not seen since Carl
went away. To avoid awkward encounters in the presence of curious
spectators, she has stopped going to the Norwegian Church and drives
up to the Reform Church at Hanover, or goes with Marie Shabata to
the Catholic Church, locally known as “the French Church.” She has
not told Marie about Carl, or her differences with her brothers.
She was never very communicative about her own affairs, and when
she came to the point, an instinct told her that about such things
she and Marie would not understand one another.

Old Mrs. Lee had been afraid that family misunderstandings might
deprive her of her yearly visit to Alexandra. But on the first day
of December Alexandra telephoned Annie that to-morrow she would
send Ivar over for her mother, and the next day the old lady arrived
with her bundles. For twelve years Mrs. Lee had always entered
Alexandra's sitting-room with the same exclamation, “Now we be yust-a
like old times!” She enjoyed the liberty Alexandra gave her, and
hearing her own language about her all day long. Here she could
wear her nightcap and sleep with all her windows shut, listen
to Ivar reading the Bible, and here she could run about among the
stables in a pair of Emil's old boots. Though she was bent almost
double, she was as spry as a gopher. Her face was as brown as if
it had been varnished, and as full of wrinkles as a washerwoman's
hands. She had three jolly old teeth left in the front of her
mouth, and when she grinned she looked very knowing, as if when
you found out how to take it, life wasn't half bad. While she and
Alexandra patched and pieced and quilted, she talked incessantly
about stories she read in a Swedish family paper, telling the plots
in great detail; or about her life on a dairy farm in Gottland
when she was a girl. Sometimes she forgot which were the printed
stories and which were the real stories, it all seemed so far away.
She loved to take a little brandy, with hot water and sugar, before
she went to bed, and Alexandra always had it ready for her. “It
sends good dreams,” she would say with a twinkle in her eye.

When Mrs. Lee had been with Alexandra for a week, Marie Shabata
telephoned one morning to say that Frank had gone to town for the
day, and she would like them to come over for coffee in the afternoon.
Mrs. Lee hurried to wash out and iron her new cross-stitched apron,
which she had finished only the night before; a checked gingham
apron worked with a design ten inches broad across the bottom;
a hunting scene, with fir trees and a stag and dogs and huntsmen.
Mrs. Lee was firm with herself at dinner, and refused a second
helping of apple dumplings. “I ta-ank I save up,” she said with
a giggle.

At two o'clock in the afternoon Alexandra's cart drove up to the
Shabatas' gate, and Marie saw Mrs. Lee's red shawl come bobbing up
the path. She ran to the door and pulled the old woman into the
house with a hug, helping her to take off her wraps while Alexandra
blanketed the horse outside. Mrs. Lee had put on her best black
satine dress--she abominated woolen stuffs, even in winter--and
a crocheted collar, fastened with a big pale gold pin, containing
faded daguerreotypes of her father and mother. She had not worn
her apron for fear of rumpling it, and now she shook it out and
tied it round her waist with a conscious air. Marie drew back and
threw up her hands, exclaiming, “Oh, what a beauty! I've never
seen this one before, have I, Mrs. Lee ?”

The old woman giggled and ducked her head. “No, yust las' night I
ma-ake. See dis tread; verra strong, no wa-ash out, no fade. My
sister send from Sveden. I yust-a ta-ank you like dis.”

Marie ran to the door again. “Come in, Alexandra. I have been
looking at Mrs. Lee's apron. Do stop on your way home and show it
to Mrs. Hiller. She's crazy about cross-stitch.”

While Alexandra removed her hat and veil, Mrs. Lee went out to the
kitchen and settled herself in a wooden rocking-chair by the stove,
looking with great interest at the table, set for three, with a white
cloth, and a pot of pink geraniums in the middle. “My, a-an't you
gotta fine plants; such-a much flower. How you keep from freeze ?”

She pointed to the window-shelves, full of blooming fuchsias and
geraniums.

“I keep the fire all night, Mrs. Lee, and when it's very cold I put
them all on the table, in the middle of the room. Other nights I
only put newspapers behind them. Frank laughs at me for fussing,
but when they don't bloom he says, 'What's the matter with the
darned things ?'--What do you hear from Carl, Alexandra ?”

“He got to Dawson before the river froze, and now I suppose I won't
hear any more until spring. Before he left California he sent me
a box of orange flowers, but they didn't keep very well. I have
brought a bunch of Emil's letters for you.” Alexandra came out
from the sitting-room and pinched Marie's cheek playfully. “You
don't look as if the weather ever froze you up. Never have colds,
do you ? That's a good girl. She had dark red cheeks like this
when she was a little girl, Mrs. Lee. She looked like some queer
foreign kind of a doll. I've never forgot the first time I saw
you in Mieklejohn's store, Marie, the time father was lying sick.
Carl and I were talking about that before he went away.”

“I remember, and Emil had his kitten along. When are you going to
send Emil's Christmas box ?”

“It ought to have gone before this. I'll have to send it by mail
now, to get it there in time.”

Marie pulled a dark purple silk necktie from her workbasket. “I
knit this for him. It's a good color, don't you think ? Will you
please put it in with your things and tell him it's from me, to
wear when he goes serenading.”

Alexandra laughed. “I don't believe he goes serenading much. He
says in one letter that the Mexican ladies are said to be very
beautiful, but that don't seem to me very warm praise.”

Marie tossed her head. “Emil can't fool me. If he's bought a
guitar, he goes serenading. Who wouldn't, with all those Spanish
girls dropping flowers down from their windows! I'd sing to them
every night, wouldn't you, Mrs. Lee ?”

The old lady chuckled. Her eyes lit up as Marie bent down and
opened the oven door. A delicious hot fragrance blew out into the
tidy kitchen. “My, somet'ing smell good!” She turned to Alexandra
with a wink, her three yellow teeth making a brave show, “I ta-ank
dat stop my yaw from ache no more!” she said contentedly.

Marie took out a pan of delicate little rolls, stuffed with stewed
apricots, and began to dust them over with powdered sugar. “I hope
you'll like these, Mrs. Lee; Alexandra does. The Bohemians always
like them with their coffee. But if you don't, I have a coffee-cake
with nuts and poppy seeds. Alexandra, will you get the cream jug ?
I put it in the window to keep cool.”

“The Bohemians,” said Alexandra, as they drew up to the table,
“certainly know how to make more kinds of bread than any other
people in the world. Old Mrs. Hiller told me once at the church
supper that she could make seven kinds of fancy bread, but Marie
could make a dozen.”

Mrs. Lee held up one of the apricot rolls between her brown thumb
and forefinger and weighed it critically. “Yust like-a fedders,”
 she pronounced with satisfaction. “My, a-an't dis nice!” she
exclaimed as she stirred her coffee. “I yust ta-ake a liddle yelly
now, too, I ta-ank.”

Alexandra and Marie laughed at her forehandedness, and fell to
talking of their own affairs. “I was afraid you had a cold when
I talked to you over the telephone the other night, Marie. What
was the matter, had you been crying ?”

“Maybe I had,” Marie smiled guiltily. “Frank was out late that
night. Don't you get lonely sometimes in the winter, when everybody
has gone away ?”

“I thought it was something like that. If I hadn't had company,
I'd have run over to see for myself. If you get down-hearted, what
will become of the rest of us ?” Alexandra asked.

“I don't, very often. There's Mrs. Lee without any coffee!”

Later, when Mrs. Lee declared that her powers were spent, Marie
and Alexandra went upstairs to look for some crochet patterns the
old lady wanted to borrow. “Better put on your coat, Alexandra.
It's cold up there, and I have no idea where those patterns are. I
may have to look through my old trunks.” Marie caught up a shawl
and opened the stair door, running up the steps ahead of her guest.
“While I go through the bureau drawers, you might look in those
hat-boxes on the closet-shelf, over where Frank's clothes hang.
There are a lot of odds and ends in them.”

She began tossing over the contents of the drawers, and Alexandra
went into the clothes-closet. Presently she came back, holding a
slender elastic yellow stick in her hand.

“What in the world is this, Marie ? You don't mean to tell me Frank
ever carried such a thing ?”

Marie blinked at it with astonishment and sat down on the floor.
“Where did you find it ? I didn't know he had kept it. I haven't
seen it for years.”

“It really is a cane, then ?”

“Yes. One he brought from the old country. He used to carry it
when I first knew him. Isn't it foolish ? Poor Frank!”

Alexandra twirled the stick in her fingers and laughed. “He must
have looked funny!”

Marie was thoughtful. “No, he didn't, really. It didn't seem out
of place. He used to be awfully gay like that when he was a young
man. I guess people always get what's hardest for them, Alexandra.”
 Marie gathered the shawl closer about her and still looked hard at
the cane. “Frank would be all right in the right place,” she said
reflectively. “He ought to have a different kind of wife, for one
thing. Do you know, Alexandra, I could pick out exactly the right
sort of woman for Frank--now. The trouble is you almost have
to marry a man before you can find out the sort of wife he needs;
and usually it's exactly the sort you are not. Then what are you
going to do about it ?” she asked candidly.

Alexandra confessed she didn't know. “However,” she added, “it
seems to me that you get along with Frank about as well as any
woman I've ever seen or heard of could.”

Marie shook her head, pursing her lips and blowing her warm breath
softly out into the frosty air. “No; I was spoiled at home. I
like my own way, and I have a quick tongue. When Frank brags, I
say sharp things, and he never forgets. He goes over and over it
in his mind; I can feel him. Then I'm too giddy. Frank's wife
ought to be timid, and she ought not to care about another living
thing in the world but just Frank! I didn't, when I married him,
but I suppose I was too young to stay like that.” Marie sighed.

Alexandra had never heard Marie speak so frankly about her husband
before, and she felt that it was wiser not to encourage her. No
good, she reasoned, ever came from talking about such things, and
while Marie was thinking aloud, Alexandra had been steadily searching
the hat-boxes. “Aren't these the patterns, Maria ?”

Maria sprang up from the floor. “Sure enough, we were looking
for patterns, weren't we ? I'd forgot about everything but Frank's
other wife. I'll put that away.”

She poked the cane behind Frank's Sunday clothes, and though she
laughed, Alexandra saw there were tears in her eyes.

When they went back to the kitchen, the snow had begun to fall,
and Marie's visitors thought they must be getting home. She went
out to the cart with them, and tucked the robes about old Mrs.
Lee while Alexandra took the blanket off her horse. As they drove
away, Marie turned and went slowly back to the house. She took up
the package of letters Alexandra had brought, but she did not read
them. She turned them over and looked at the foreign stamps, and
then sat watching the flying snow while the dusk deepened in the
kitchen and the stove sent out a red glow.

Marie knew perfectly well that Emil's letters were written more for
her than for Alexandra. They were not the sort of letters that a
young man writes to his sister. They were both more personal and
more painstaking; full of descriptions of the gay life in the old
Mexican capital in the days when the strong hand of Porfirio Diaz
was still strong. He told about bull-fights and cock-fights,
churches and FIESTAS, the flower-markets and the fountains, the
music and dancing, the people of all nations he met in the Italian
restaurants on San Francisco Street. In short, they were the kind
of letters a young man writes to a woman when he wishes himself
and his life to seem interesting to her, when he wishes to enlist
her imagination in his behalf.

Marie, when she was alone or when she sat sewing in the evening,
often thought about what it must be like down there where Emil was;
where there were flowers and street bands everywhere, and carriages
rattling up and down, and where there was a little blind boot-black
in front of the cathedral who could play any tune you asked for
by dropping the lids of blacking-boxes on the stone steps. When
everything is done and over for one at twenty-three, it is pleasant
to let the mind wander forth and follow a young adventurer who has
life before him. “And if it had not been for me,” she thought,
“Frank might still be free like that, and having a good time making
people admire him. Poor Frank, getting married wasn't very good
for him either. I'm afraid I do set people against him, as he says.
I seem, somehow, to give him away all the time. Perhaps he would
try to be agreeable to people again, if I were not around. It
seems as if I always make him just as bad as he can be.”

Later in the winter, Alexandra looked back upon that afternoon as
the last satisfactory visit she had had with Marie. After that
day the younger woman seemed to shrink more and more into herself.
When she was with Alexandra she was not spontaneous and frank
as she used to be. She seemed to be brooding over something, and
holding something back. The weather had a good deal to do with
their seeing less of each other than usual. There had not been
such snowstorms in twenty years, and the path across the fields was
drifted deep from Christmas until March. When the two neighbors
went to see each other, they had to go round by the wagon-road,
which was twice as far. They telephoned each other almost every
night, though in January there was a stretch of three weeks when
the wires were down, and when the postman did not come at all.

Marie often ran in to see her nearest neighbor, old Mrs. Hiller,
who was crippled with rheumatism and had only her son, the lame
shoemaker, to take care of her; and she went to the French Church,
whatever the weather. She was a sincerely devout girl. She prayed
for herself and for Frank, and for Emil, among the temptations of
that gay, corrupt old city. She found more comfort in the Church
that winter than ever before. It seemed to come closer to her,
and to fill an emptiness that ached in her heart. She tried to
be patient with her husband. He and his hired man usually played
California Jack in the evening. Marie sat sewing or crocheting and
tried to take a friendly interest in the game, but she was always
thinking about the wide fields outside, where the snow was drifting
over the fences; and about the orchard, where the snow was falling
and packing, crust over crust. When she went out into the dark
kitchen to fix her plants for the night, she used to stand by the
window and look out at the white fields, or watch the currents of
snow whirling over the orchard. She seemed to feel the weight of
all the snow that lay down there. The branches had become so hard
that they wounded your hand if you but tried to break a twig. And
yet, down under the frozen crusts, at the roots of the trees, the
secret of life was still safe, warm as the blood in one's heart;
and the spring would come again! Oh, it would come again!




II

If Alexandra had had much imagination she might have guessed what
was going on in Marie's mind, and she would have seen long before
what was going on in Emil's. But that, as Emil himself had more
than once reflected, was Alexandra's blind side, and her life had
not been of the kind to sharpen her vision. Her training had all
been toward the end of making her proficient in what she had undertaken
to do. Her personal life, her own realization of herself, was
almost a subconscious existence; like an underground river that
came to the surface only here and there, at intervals months apart,
and then sank again to flow on under her own fields. Nevertheless,
the underground stream was there, and it was because she had so much
personality to put into her enterprises and succeeded in putting
it into them so completely, that her affairs prospered better than
those of her neighbors.

There were certain days in her life, outwardly uneventful, which
Alexandra remembered as peculiarly happy; days when she was close
to the flat, fallow world about her, and felt, as it were, in her
own body the joyous germination in the soil. There were days,
too, which she and Emil had spent together, upon which she loved
to look back. There had been such a day when they were down on
the river in the dry year, looking over the land. They had made
an early start one morning and had driven a long way before noon.
When Emil said he was hungry, they drew back from the road, gave
Brigham his oats among the bushes, and climbed up to the top of a
grassy bluff to eat their lunch under the shade of some little elm
trees. The river was clear there, and shallow, since there had
been no rain, and it ran in ripples over the sparkling sand. Under
the overhanging willows of the opposite bank there was an inlet where
the water was deeper and flowed so slowly that it seemed to sleep
in the sun. In this little bay a single wild duck was swimming and
diving and preening her feathers, disporting herself very happily
in the flickering light and shade. They sat for a long time,
watching the solitary bird take its pleasure. No living thing
had ever seemed to Alexandra as beautiful as that wild duck. Emil
must have felt about it as she did, for afterward, when they were
at home, he used sometimes to say, “Sister, you know our duck down
there--” Alexandra remembered that day as one of the happiest in
her life. Years afterward she thought of the duck as still there,
swimming and diving all by herself in the sunlight, a kind of
enchanted bird that did not know age or change.

Most of Alexandra's happy memories were as impersonal as this one;
yet to her they were very personal. Her mind was a white book,
with clear writing about weather and beasts and growing things.
Not many people would have cared to read it; only a happy few.
She had never been in love, she had never indulged in sentimental
reveries. Even as a girl she had looked upon men as work-fellows.
She had grown up in serious times.

There was one fancy indeed, which persisted through her girlhood.
It most often came to her on Sunday mornings, the one day in
the week when she lay late abed listening to the familiar morning
sounds; the windmill singing in the brisk breeze, Emil whistling
as he blacked his boots down by the kitchen door. Sometimes, as
she lay thus luxuriously idle, her eyes closed, she used to have
an illusion of being lifted up bodily and carried lightly by some
one very strong. It was a man, certainly, who carried her, but
he was like no man she knew; he was much larger and stronger and
swifter, and he carried her as easily as if she were a sheaf of
wheat. She never saw him, but, with eyes closed, she could feel
that he was yellow like the sunlight, and there was the smell of
ripe cornfields about him. She could feel him approach, bend over
her and lift her, and then she could feel herself being carried
swiftly off across the fields. After such a reverie she would rise
hastily, angry with herself, and go down to the bath-house that
was partitioned off the kitchen shed. There she would stand in a
tin tub and prosecute her bath with vigor, finishing it by pouring
buckets of cold well-water over her gleaming white body which no
man on the Divide could have carried very far.

As she grew older, this fancy more often came to her when she was
tired than when she was fresh and strong. Sometimes, after she had
been in the open all day, overseeing the branding of the cattle or
the loading of the pigs, she would come in chilled, take a concoction
of spices and warm home-made wine, and go to bed with her body
actually aching with fatigue. Then, just before she went to sleep,
she had the old sensation of being lifted and carried by a strong
being who took from her all her bodily weariness.




PART IV. The White Mulberry Tree




I

The French Church, properly the Church of Sainte-Agnes, stood
upon a hill. The high, narrow, red-brick building, with its tall
steeple and steep roof, could be seen for miles across the wheatfields,
though the little town of Sainte-Agnes was completely hidden away
at the foot of the hill. The church looked powerful and triumphant
there on its eminence, so high above the rest of the landscape,
with miles of warm color lying at its feet, and by its position and
setting it reminded one of some of the churches built long ago in
the wheat-lands of middle France.

Late one June afternoon Alexandra Bergson was driving along one
of the many roads that led through the rich French farming country
to the big church. The sunlight was shining directly in her face,
and there was a blaze of light all about the red church on the
hill. Beside Alexandra lounged a strikingly exotic figure in a
tall Mexican hat, a silk sash, and a black velvet jacket sewn with
silver buttons. Emil had returned only the night before, and his
sister was so proud of him that she decided at once to take him up
to the church supper, and to make him wear the Mexican costume he
had brought home in his trunk. “All the girls who have stands are
going to wear fancy costumes,” she argued, “and some of the boys.
Marie is going to tell fortunes, and she sent to Omaha for a Bohemian
dress her father brought back from a visit to the old country.
If you wear those clothes, they will all be pleased. And you must
take your guitar. Everybody ought to do what they can to help
along, and we have never done much. We are not a talented family.”

The supper was to be at six o'clock, in the basement of the church,
and afterward there would be a fair, with charades and an auction.
Alexandra had set out from home early, leaving the house to Signa
and Nelse Jensen, who were to be married next week. Signa had
shyly asked to have the wedding put off until Emil came home.

Alexandra was well satisfied with her brother. As they drove
through the rolling French country toward the westering sun and the
stalwart church, she was thinking of that time long ago when she
and Emil drove back from the river valley to the still unconquered
Divide. Yes, she told herself, it had been worth while; both Emil
and the country had become what she had hoped. Out of her father's
children there was one who was fit to cope with the world, who had
not been tied to the plow, and who had a personality apart from the
soil. And that, she reflected, was what she had worked for. She
felt well satisfied with her life.

When they reached the church, a score of teams were hitched in
front of the basement doors that opened from the hillside upon the
sanded terrace, where the boys wrestled and had jumping-matches.
Amedee Chevalier, a proud father of one week, rushed out and
embraced Emil. Amedee was an only son,--hence he was a very rich
young man,--but he meant to have twenty children himself, like
his uncle Xavier. “Oh, Emil,” he cried, hugging his old friend
rapturously, “why ain't you been up to see my boy ? You come
to-morrow, sure ? Emil, you wanna get a boy right off! It's the
greatest thing ever! No, no, no! Angel not sick at all. Everything
just fine. That boy he come into this world laughin', and he been
laughin' ever since. You come an' see!” He pounded Emil's ribs
to emphasize each announcement.

Emil caught his arms. “Stop, Amedee. You're knocking the wind out
of me. I brought him cups and spoons and blankets and moccasins
enough for an orphan asylum. I'm awful glad it's a boy, sure
enough!”

The young men crowded round Emil to admire his costume and to tell
him in a breath everything that had happened since he went away.
Emil had more friends up here in the French country than down on
Norway Creek. The French and Bohemian boys were spirited and jolly,
liked variety, and were as much predisposed to favor anything new
as the Scandinavian boys were to reject it. The Norwegian and
Swedish lads were much more self-centred, apt to be egotistical
and jealous. They were cautious and reserved with Emil because he
had been away to college, and were prepared to take him down if he
should try to put on airs with them. The French boys liked a bit
of swagger, and they were always delighted to hear about anything
new: new clothes, new games, new songs, new dances. Now they
carried Emil off to show him the club room they had just fitted up
over the post-office, down in the village. They ran down the hill
in a drove, all laughing and chattering at once, some in French,
some in English.

Alexandra went into the cool, whitewashed basement where the women
were setting the tables. Marie was standing on a chair, building
a little tent of shawls where she was to tell fortunes. She sprang
down and ran toward Alexandra, stopping short and looking at her
in disappointment. Alexandra nodded to her encouragingly.

“Oh, he will be here, Marie. The boys have taken him off to show
him something. You won't know him. He is a man now, sure enough.
I have no boy left. He smokes terrible-smelling Mexican cigarettes
and talks Spanish. How pretty you look, child. Where did you get
those beautiful earrings ?”

“They belonged to father's mother. He always promised them to me.
He sent them with the dress and said I could keep them.”

Marie wore a short red skirt of stoutly woven cloth, a white bodice
and kirtle, a yellow silk turban wound low over her brown curls,
and long coral pendants in her ears. Her ears had been pierced
against a piece of cork by her great-aunt when she was seven years
old. In those germless days she had worn bits of broom-straw, plucked
from the common sweeping-broom, in the lobes until the holes were
healed and ready for little gold rings.

When Emil came back from the village, he lingered outside on the
terrace with the boys. Marie could hear him talking and strumming
on his guitar while Raoul Marcel sang falsetto. She was vexed
with him for staying out there. It made her very nervous to hear
him and not to see him; for, certainly, she told herself, she was
not going out to look for him. When the supper bell rang and the
boys came trooping in to get seats at the first table, she forgot
all about her annoyance and ran to greet the tallest of the crowd,
in his conspicuous attire. She didn't mind showing her embarrassment
at all. She blushed and laughed excitedly as she gave Emil her
hand, and looked delightedly at the black velvet coat that brought
out his fair skin and fine blond head. Marie was incapable of being
lukewarm about anything that pleased her. She simply did not know
how to give a half-hearted response. When she was delighted, she
was as likely as not to stand on her tip-toes and clap her hands.
If people laughed at her, she laughed with them.

“Do the men wear clothes like that every day, in the street ?” She
caught Emil by his sleeve and turned him about. “Oh, I wish I lived
where people wore things like that! Are the buttons real silver ?
Put on the hat, please. What a heavy thing! How do you ever wear
it ? Why don't you tell us about the bull-fights ?”

She wanted to wring all his experiences from him at once, without
waiting a moment. Emil smiled tolerantly and stood looking down at
her with his old, brooding gaze, while the French girls fluttered
about him in their white dresses and ribbons, and Alexandra watched
the scene with pride. Several of the French girls, Marie knew, were
hoping that Emil would take them to supper, and she was relieved
when he took only his sister. Marie caught Frank's arm and dragged
him to the same table, managing to get seats opposite the Bergsons,
so that she could hear what they were talking about. Alexandra
made Emil tell Mrs. Xavier Chevalier, the mother of the twenty,
about how he had seen a famous matador killed in the bull-ring.
Marie listened to every word, only taking her eyes from Emil to
watch Frank's plate and keep it filled. When Emil finished his
account,--bloody enough to satisfy Mrs. Xavier and to make her
feel thankful that she was not a matador,--Marie broke out with
a volley of questions. How did the women dress when they went to
bull-fights ? Did they wear mantillas ? Did they never wear hats ?

After supper the young people played charades for the amusement
of their elders, who sat gossiping between their guesses. All the
shops in Sainte-Agnes were closed at eight o'clock that night, so
that the merchants and their clerks could attend the fair. The
auction was the liveliest part of the entertainment, for the French
boys always lost their heads when they began to bid, satisfied that
their extravagance was in a good cause. After all the pincushions
and sofa pillows and embroidered slippers were sold, Emil precipitated
a panic by taking out one of his turquoise shirt studs, which every
one had been admiring, and handing it to the auctioneer. All the
French girls clamored for it, and their sweethearts bid against
each other recklessly. Marie wanted it, too, and she kept making
signals to Frank, which he took a sour pleasure in disregarding.
He didn't see the use of making a fuss over a fellow just because
he was dressed like a clown. When the turquoise went to Malvina
Sauvage, the French banker's daughter, Marie shrugged her shoulders
and betook herself to her little tent of shawls, where she began
to shuffle her cards by the light of a tallow candle, calling out,
“Fortunes, fortunes!”

The young priest, Father Duchesne, went first to have his fortune
read. Marie took his long white hand, looked at it, and then
began to run off her cards. “I see a long journey across water for
you, Father. You will go to a town all cut up by water; built on
islands, it seems to be, with rivers and green fields all about.
And you will visit an old lady with a white cap and gold hoops in
her ears, and you will be very happy there.”

“Mais, oui,” said the priest, with a melancholy smile. “C'est
L'Isle-Adam, chez ma mere. Vous etes tres savante, ma fille.” He
patted her yellow turban, calling, “Venez donc, mes garcons! Il
y a ici une veritable clairvoyante!”

Marie was clever at fortune-telling, indulging in a light irony
that amused the crowd. She told old Brunot, the miser, that he
would lose all his money, marry a girl of sixteen, and live happily
on a crust. Sholte, the fat Russian boy, who lived for his stomach,
was to be disappointed in love, grow thin, and shoot himself from
despondency. Amedee was to have twenty children, and nineteen of
them were to be girls. Amedee slapped Frank on the back and asked
him why he didn't see what the fortune-teller would promise him.
But Frank shook off his friendly hand and grunted, “She tell my
fortune long ago; bad enough!” Then he withdrew to a corner and
sat glowering at his wife.

Frank's case was all the more painful because he had no one
in particular to fix his jealousy upon. Sometimes he could have
thanked the man who would bring him evidence against his wife.
He had discharged a good farm-boy, Jan Smirka, because he thought
Marie was fond of him; but she had not seemed to miss Jan when
he was gone, and she had been just as kind to the next boy. The
farm-hands would always do anything for Marie; Frank couldn't find
one so surly that he would not make an effort to please her. At
the bottom of his heart Frank knew well enough that if he could once
give up his grudge, his wife would come back to him. But he could
never in the world do that. The grudge was fundamental. Perhaps
he could not have given it up if he had tried. Perhaps he got more
satisfaction out of feeling himself abused than he would have got
out of being loved. If he could once have made Marie thoroughly
unhappy, he might have relented and raised her from the dust. But
she had never humbled herself. In the first days of their love
she had been his slave; she had admired him abandonedly. But the
moment he began to bully her and to be unjust, she began to draw
away; at first in tearful amazement, then in quiet, unspoken disgust.
The distance between them had widened and hardened. It no longer
contracted and brought them suddenly together. The spark of her
life went somewhere else, and he was always watching to surprise
it. He knew that somewhere she must get a feeling to live upon,
for she was not a woman who could live without loving. He wanted
to prove to himself the wrong he felt. What did she hide in her
heart ? Where did it go ? Even Frank had his churlish delicacies;
he never reminded her of how much she had once loved him. For that
Marie was grateful to him.

While Marie was chattering to the French boys, Amedee called Emil
to the back of the room and whispered to him that they were going
to play a joke on the girls. At eleven o'clock, Amedee was to go
up to the switchboard in the vestibule and turn off the electric
lights, and every boy would have a chance to kiss his sweetheart
before Father Duchesne could find his way up the stairs to turn the
current on again. The only difficulty was the candle in Marie's
tent; perhaps, as Emil had no sweetheart, he would oblige the boys
by blowing out the candle. Emil said he would undertake to do
that.

At five minutes to eleven he sauntered up to Marie's booth, and
the French boys dispersed to find their girls. He leaned over the
card-table and gave himself up to looking at her. “Do you think
you could tell my fortune ?” he murmured. It was the first word he
had had alone with her for almost a year. “My luck hasn't changed
any. It's just the same.”

Marie had often wondered whether there was anyone else who could
look his thoughts to you as Emil could. To-night, when she met his
steady, powerful eyes, it was impossible not to feel the sweetness
of the dream he was dreaming; it reached her before she could shut
it out, and hid itself in her heart. She began to shuffle her
cards furiously. “I'm angry with you, Emil,” she broke out with
petulance. “Why did you give them that lovely blue stone to sell ?
You might have known Frank wouldn't buy it for me, and I wanted it
awfully!”

Emil laughed shortly. “People who want such little things surely
ought to have them,” he said dryly. He thrust his hand into the
pocket of his velvet trousers and brought out a handful of uncut
turquoises, as big as marbles. Leaning over the table he dropped
them into her lap. “There, will those do ? Be careful, don't let
any one see them. Now, I suppose you want me to go away and let
you play with them ?”

Marie was gazing in rapture at the soft blue color of the stones.
“Oh, Emil! Is everything down there beautiful like these ? How
could you ever come away ?”

At that instant Amedee laid hands on the switchboard. There was a
shiver and a giggle, and every one looked toward the red blur that
Marie's candle made in the dark. Immediately that, too, was gone.
Little shrieks and currents of soft laughter ran up and down the
dark hall. Marie started up,--directly into Emil's arms. In the
same instant she felt his lips. The veil that had hung uncertainly
between them for so long was dissolved. Before she knew what she
was doing, she had committed herself to that kiss that was at once
a boy's and a man's, as timid as it was tender; so like Emil and
so unlike any one else in the world. Not until it was over did
she realize what it meant. And Emil, who had so often imagined
the shock of this first kiss, was surprised at its gentleness and
naturalness. It was like a sigh which they had breathed together;
almost sorrowful, as if each were afraid of wakening something in
the other.

When the lights came on again, everybody was laughing and shouting,
and all the French girls were rosy and shining with mirth. Only
Marie, in her little tent of shawls, was pale and quiet. Under her
yellow turban the red coral pendants swung against white cheeks.
Frank was still staring at her, but he seemed to see nothing. Years
ago, he himself had had the power to take the blood from her cheeks
like that. Perhaps he did not remember--perhaps he had never
noticed! Emil was already at the other end of the hall, walking
about with the shoulder-motion he had acquired among the Mexicans,
studying the floor with his intent, deep-set eyes. Marie began to
take down and fold her shawls. She did not glance up again. The
young people drifted to the other end of the hall where the guitar
was sounding. In a moment she heard Emil and Raoul singing:--


“Across the Rio Grand-e There lies a sunny land-e, My bright-eyed
Mexico!”


Alexandra Bergson came up to the card booth. “Let me help you,
Marie. You look tired.”

She placed her hand on Marie's arm and felt her shiver. Marie
stiffened under that kind, calm hand. Alexandra drew back, perplexed
and hurt.

There was about Alexandra something of the impervious calm of the
fatalist, always disconcerting to very young people, who cannot
feel that the heart lives at all unless it is still at the mercy
of storms; unless its strings can scream to the touch of pain.




II

Signa's wedding supper was over. The guests, and the tiresome
little Norwegian preacher who had performed the marriage ceremony,
were saying good-night. Old Ivar was hitching the horses to the
wagon to take the wedding presents and the bride and groom up to
their new home, on Alexandra's north quarter. When Ivar drove up
to the gate, Emil and Marie Shabata began to carry out the presents,
and Alexandra went into her bedroom to bid Signa good-bye and to
give her a few words of good counsel. She was surprised to find
that the bride had changed her slippers for heavy shoes and was
pinning up her skirts. At that moment Nelse appeared at the gate
with the two milk cows that Alexandra had given Signa for a wedding
present.

Alexandra began to laugh. “Why, Signa, you and Nelse are to ride
home. I'll send Ivar over with the cows in the morning.”

Signa hesitated and looked perplexed. When her husband called her,
she pinned her hat on resolutely. “I ta-ank I better do yust like
he say,” she murmured in confusion.

Alexandra and Marie accompanied Signa to the gate and saw the
party set off, old Ivar driving ahead in the wagon and the bride
and groom following on foot, each leading a cow. Emil burst into
a laugh before they were out of hearing.

“Those two will get on,” said Alexandra as they turned back to the
house. “They are not going to take any chances. They will feel
safer with those cows in their own stable. Marie, I am going to
send for an old woman next. As soon as I get the girls broken in,
I marry them off.”

“I've no patience with Signa, marrying that grumpy fellow!” Marie
declared. “I wanted her to marry that nice Smirka boy who worked
for us last winter. I think she liked him, too.”

“Yes, I think she did,” Alexandra assented, “but I suppose she was
too much afraid of Nelse to marry any one else. Now that I think
of it, most of my girls have married men they were afraid of. I
believe there is a good deal of the cow in most Swedish girls.
You high-strung Bohemian can't understand us. We're a terribly
practical people, and I guess we think a cross man makes a good
manager.”

Marie shrugged her shoulders and turned to pin up a lock of hair
that had fallen on her neck. Somehow Alexandra had irritated her
of late. Everybody irritated her. She was tired of everybody. “I'm
going home alone, Emil, so you needn't get your hat,” she said as
she wound her scarf quickly about her head. “Good-night, Alexandra,”
 she called back in a strained voice, running down the gravel walk.

Emil followed with long strides until he overtook her. Then she began
to walk slowly. It was a night of warm wind and faint starlight,
and the fireflies were glimmering over the wheat.

“Marie,” said Emil after they had walked for a while, “I wonder if
you know how unhappy I am ?”

Marie did not answer him. Her head, in its white scarf, drooped
forward a little.

Emil kicked a clod from the path and went on:--

“I wonder whether you are really shallow-hearted, like you seem ?
Sometimes I think one boy does just as well as another for you.
It never seems to make much difference whether it is me or Raoul
Marcel or Jan Smirka. Are you really like that ?”

“Perhaps I am. What do you want me to do ? Sit round and cry all
day ? When I've cried until I can't cry any more, then--then I must
do something else.”

“Are you sorry for me ?” he persisted.

“No, I'm not. If I were big and free like you, I wouldn't let
anything make me unhappy. As old Napoleon Brunot said at the fair,
I wouldn't go lovering after no woman. I'd take the first train
and go off and have all the fun there is.”

“I tried that, but it didn't do any good. Everything reminded me.
The nicer the place was, the more I wanted you.” They had come to
the stile and Emil pointed to it persuasively. “Sit down a moment,
I want to ask you something.” Marie sat down on the top step and
Emil drew nearer. “Would you tell me something that's none of my
business if you thought it would help me out ? Well, then, tell
me, PLEASE tell me, why you ran away with Frank Shabata!”

Marie drew back. “Because I was in love with him,” she said firmly.

“Really ?” he asked incredulously.

“Yes, indeed. Very much in love with him. I think I was the one
who suggested our running away. From the first it was more my
fault than his.”

Emil turned away his face.

“And now,” Marie went on, “I've got to remember that. Frank is
just the same now as he was then, only then I would see him as I
wanted him to be. I would have my own way. And now I pay for it.”

“You don't do all the paying.”

“That's it. When one makes a mistake, there's no telling where
it will stop. But you can go away; you can leave all this behind
you.”

“Not everything. I can't leave you behind. Will you go away with
me, Marie ?”

Marie started up and stepped across the stile. “Emil! How wickedly
you talk! I am not that kind of a girl, and you know it. But what
am I going to do if you keep tormenting me like this!” she added
plaintively.

“Marie, I won't bother you any more if you will tell me just
one thing. Stop a minute and look at me. No, nobody can see us.
Everybody's asleep. That was only a firefly. Marie, STOP and tell
me!”

Emil overtook her and catching her by the shoulders shook her
gently, as if he were trying to awaken a sleepwalker.

Marie hid her face on his arm. “Don't ask me anything more. I
don't know anything except how miserable I am. And I thought it
would be all right when you came back. Oh, Emil,” she clutched his
sleeve and began to cry, “what am I to do if you don't go away ? I
can't go, and one of us must. Can't you see ?”

Emil stood looking down at her, holding his shoulders stiff and
stiffening the arm to which she clung. Her white dress looked
gray in the darkness. She seemed like a troubled spirit, like some
shadow out of the earth, clinging to him and entreating him to give
her peace. Behind her the fireflies were weaving in and out over
the wheat. He put his hand on her bent head. “On my honor, Marie,
if you will say you love me, I will go away.”

She lifted her face to his. “How could I help it ? Didn't you
know ?”

Emil was the one who trembled, through all his frame. After he
left Marie at her gate, he wandered about the fields all night,
till morning put out the fireflies and the stars.




III

One evening, a week after Signa's wedding, Emil was kneeling before
a box in the sitting-room, packing his books. From time to time
he rose and wandered about the house, picking up stray volumes and
bringing them listlessly back to his box. He was packing without
enthusiasm. He was not very sanguine about his future. Alexandra
sat sewing by the table. She had helped him pack his trunk in
the afternoon. As Emil came and went by her chair with his books,
he thought to himself that it had not been so hard to leave his
sister since he first went away to school. He was going directly
to Omaha, to read law in the office of a Swedish lawyer until
October, when he would enter the law school at Ann Arbor. They
had planned that Alexandra was to come to Michigan--a long journey
for her--at Christmas time, and spend several weeks with him.
Nevertheless, he felt that this leave-taking would be more final
than his earlier ones had been; that it meant a definite break with
his old home and the beginning of something new--he did not know
what. His ideas about the future would not crystallize; the more
he tried to think about it, the vaguer his conception of it became.
But one thing was clear, he told himself; it was high time that he
made good to Alexandra, and that ought to be incentive enough to
begin with.

As he went about gathering up his books he felt as if he were
uprooting things. At last he threw himself down on the old slat
lounge where he had slept when he was little, and lay looking up
at the familiar cracks in the ceiling.

“Tired, Emil ?” his sister asked.

“Lazy,” he murmured, turning on his side and looking at her. He
studied Alexandra's face for a long time in the lamplight. It had
never occurred to him that his sister was a handsome woman until
Marie Shabata had told him so. Indeed, he had never thought of
her as being a woman at all, only a sister. As he studied her bent
head, he looked up at the picture of John Bergson above the lamp.
“No,” he thought to himself, “she didn't get it there. I suppose
I am more like that.”

“Alexandra,” he said suddenly, “that old walnut secretary you use
for a desk was father's, wasn't it ?”

Alexandra went on stitching. “Yes. It was one of the first things
he bought for the old log house. It was a great extravagance
in those days. But he wrote a great many letters back to the old
country. He had many friends there, and they wrote to him up to the
time he died. No one ever blamed him for grandfather's disgrace.
I can see him now, sitting there on Sundays, in his white shirt,
writing pages and pages, so carefully. He wrote a fine, regular
hand, almost like engraving. Yours is something like his, when
you take pains.”

“Grandfather was really crooked, was he ?”

“He married an unscrupulous woman, and then--then I'm afraid he
was really crooked. When we first came here father used to have
dreams about making a great fortune and going back to Sweden to
pay back to the poor sailors the money grandfather had lost.”

Emil stirred on the lounge. “I say, that would have been worth
while, wouldn't it ? Father wasn't a bit like Lou or Oscar, was
he ? I can't remember much about him before he got sick.”

“Oh, not at all!” Alexandra dropped her sewing on her knee. “He
had better opportunities; not to make money, but to make something
of himself. He was a quiet man, but he was very intelligent. You
would have been proud of him, Emil.”

Alexandra felt that he would like to know there had been a man of
his kin whom he could admire. She knew that Emil was ashamed of
Lou and Oscar, because they were bigoted and self-satisfied. He
never said much about them, but she could feel his disgust. His
brothers had shown their disapproval of him ever since he first
went away to school. The only thing that would have satisfied them
would have been his failure at the University. As it was, they
resented every change in his speech, in his dress, in his point of
view; though the latter they had to conjecture, for Emil avoided
talking to them about any but family matters. All his interests
they treated as affectations.

Alexandra took up her sewing again. “I can remember father when
he was quite a young man. He belonged to some kind of a musical
society, a male chorus, in Stockholm. I can remember going with
mother to hear them sing. There must have been a hundred of them,
and they all wore long black coats and white neckties. I was
used to seeing father in a blue coat, a sort of jacket, and when I
recognized him on the platform, I was very proud. Do you remember
that Swedish song he taught you, about the ship boy ?”

“Yes. I used to sing it to the Mexicans. They like anything
different.” Emil paused. “Father had a hard fight here, didn't
he ?” he added thoughtfully.

“Yes, and he died in a dark time. Still, he had hope. He believed
in the land.”

“And in you, I guess,” Emil said to himself. There was another
period of silence; that warm, friendly silence, full of perfect
understanding, in which Emil and Alexandra had spent many of their
happiest half-hours.

At last Emil said abruptly, “Lou and Oscar would be better off if
they were poor, wouldn't they ?”

Alexandra smiled. “Maybe. But their children wouldn't. I have
great hopes of Milly.”

Emil shivered. “I don't know. Seems to me it gets worse as it
goes on. The worst of the Swedes is that they're never willing
to find out how much they don't know. It was like that at the
University. Always so pleased with themselves! There's no getting
behind that conceited Swedish grin. The Bohemians and Germans were
so different.”

“Come, Emil, don't go back on your own people. Father wasn't
conceited, Uncle Otto wasn't. Even Lou and Oscar weren't when they
were boys.”

Emil looked incredulous, but he did not dispute the point. He
turned on his back and lay still for a long time, his hands locked
under his head, looking up at the ceiling. Alexandra knew that he
was thinking of many things. She felt no anxiety about Emil. She
had always believed in him, as she had believed in the land. He
had been more like himself since he got back from Mexico; seemed
glad to be at home, and talked to her as he used to do. She had
no doubt that his wandering fit was over, and that he would soon
be settled in life.

“Alexandra,” said Emil suddenly, “do you remember the wild duck we
saw down on the river that time ?”

His sister looked up. “I often think of her. It always seems to
me she's there still, just like we saw her.”

“I know. It's queer what things one remembers and what things one
forgets.” Emil yawned and sat up. “Well, it's time to turn in.”
 He rose, and going over to Alexandra stooped down and kissed her
lightly on the cheek. “Good-night, sister. I think you did pretty
well by us.”

Emil took up his lamp and went upstairs. Alexandra sat finishing
his new nightshirt, that must go in the top tray of his trunk.




IV

The next morning Angelique, Amedee's wife, was in the kitchen baking
pies, assisted by old Mrs. Chevalier. Between the mixing-board
and the stove stood the old cradle that had been Amedee's, and in
it was his black-eyed son. As Angelique, flushed and excited, with
flour on her hands, stopped to smile at the baby, Emil Bergson rode
up to the kitchen door on his mare and dismounted.

“'Medee is out in the field, Emil,” Angelique called as she ran
across the kitchen to the oven. “He begins to cut his wheat to-day;
the first wheat ready to cut anywhere about here. He bought a new
header, you know, because all the wheat's so short this year. I
hope he can rent it to the neighbors, it cost so much. He and his
cousins bought a steam thresher on shares. You ought to go out and
see that header work. I watched it an hour this morning, busy as
I am with all the men to feed. He has a lot of hands, but he's
the only one that knows how to drive the header or how to run the
engine, so he has to be everywhere at once. He's sick, too, and
ought to be in his bed.”

Emil bent over Hector Baptiste, trying to make him blink his round,
bead-like black eyes. “Sick ? What's the matter with your daddy,
kid ? Been making him walk the floor with you ?”

Angelique sniffed. “Not much! We don't have that kind of babies.
It was his father that kept Baptiste awake. All night I had to be
getting up and making mustard plasters to put on his stomach. He
had an awful colic. He said he felt better this morning, but I
don't think he ought to be out in the field, overheating himself.”

Angelique did not speak with much anxiety, not because she was
indifferent, but because she felt so secure in their good fortune.
Only good things could happen to a rich, energetic, handsome young
man like Amedee, with a new baby in the cradle and a new header in
the field.

Emil stroked the black fuzz on Baptiste's head. “I say, Angelique,
one of 'Medee's grandmothers, 'way back, must have been a squaw.
This kid looks exactly like the Indian babies.”

Angelique made a face at him, but old Mrs. Chevalier had been
touched on a sore point, and she let out such a stream of fiery
PATOIS that Emil fled from the kitchen and mounted his mare.

Opening the pasture gate from the saddle, Emil rode across the field
to the clearing where the thresher stood, driven by a stationary
engine and fed from the header boxes. As Amedee was not on the
engine, Emil rode on to the wheatfield, where he recognized, on
the header, the slight, wiry figure of his friend, coatless, his
white shirt puffed out by the wind, his straw hat stuck jauntily
on the side of his head. The six big work-horses that drew, or
rather pushed, the header, went abreast at a rapid walk, and as they
were still green at the work they required a good deal of management
on Amedee's part; especially when they turned the corners, where
they divided, three and three, and then swung round into line again
with a movement that looked as complicated as a wheel of artillery.
Emil felt a new thrill of admiration for his friend, and with it
the old pang of envy at the way in which Amedee could do with his
might what his hand found to do, and feel that, whatever it was,
it was the most important thing in the world. “I'll have to bring
Alexandra up to see this thing work,” Emil thought; “it's splendid!”

When he saw Emil, Amedee waved to him and called to one of his
twenty cousins to take the reins. Stepping off the header without
stopping it, he ran up to Emil who had dismounted. “Come along,”
 he called. “I have to go over to the engine for a minute. I gotta
green man running it, and I gotta to keep an eye on him.”

Emil thought the lad was unnaturally flushed and more excited than
even the cares of managing a big farm at a critical time warranted.
As they passed behind a last year's stack, Amedee clutched at his
right side and sank down for a moment on the straw.

“Ouch! I got an awful pain in me, Emil. Something's the matter
with my insides, for sure.”

Emil felt his fiery cheek. “You ought to go straight to bed,
'Medee, and telephone for the doctor; that's what you ought to do.”

Amedee staggered up with a gesture of despair. “How can I ? I got
no time to be sick. Three thousand dollars' worth of new machinery
to manage, and the wheat so ripe it will begin to shatter next
week. My wheat's short, but it's gotta grand full berries. What's
he slowing down for ? We haven't got header boxes enough to feed
the thresher, I guess.”

Amedee started hot-foot across the stubble, leaning a little to the
right as he ran, and waved to the engineer not to stop the engine.

Emil saw that this was no time to talk about his own affairs. He
mounted his mare and rode on to Sainte-Agnes, to bid his friends
there good-bye. He went first to see Raoul Marcel, and found him
innocently practising the “Gloria” for the big confirmation service
on Sunday while he polished the mirrors of his father's saloon.

As Emil rode homewards at three o'clock in the afternoon, he saw
Amedee staggering out of the wheatfield, supported by two of his
cousins. Emil stopped and helped them put the boy to bed.




V

When Frank Shabata came in from work at five o'clock that evening,
old Moses Marcel, Raoul's father, telephoned him that Amedee had
had a seizure in the wheatfield, and that Doctor Paradis was going
to operate on him as soon as the Hanover doctor got there to help.
Frank dropped a word of this at the table, bolted his supper, and
rode off to Sainte-Agnes, where there would be sympathetic discussion
of Amedee's case at Marcel's saloon.

As soon as Frank was gone, Marie telephoned Alexandra. It was a
comfort to hear her friend's voice. Yes, Alexandra knew what there
was to be known about Amedee. Emil had been there when they carried
him out of the field, and had stayed with him until the doctors
operated for appendicitis at five o'clock. They were afraid it
was too late to do much good; it should have been done three days
ago. Amedee was in a very bad way. Emil had just come home, worn
out and sick himself. She had given him some brandy and put him
to bed.

Marie hung up the receiver. Poor Amedee's illness had taken on a
new meaning to her, now that she knew Emil had been with him. And
it might so easily have been the other way--Emil who was ill and
Amedee who was sad! Marie looked about the dusky sitting-room.
She had seldom felt so utterly lonely. If Emil was asleep, there
was not even a chance of his coming; and she could not go to
Alexandra for sympathy. She meant to tell Alexandra everything,
as soon as Emil went away. Then whatever was left between them
would be honest.

But she could not stay in the house this evening. Where should she
go ? She walked slowly down through the orchard, where the evening
air was heavy with the smell of wild cotton. The fresh, salty scent
of the wild roses had given way before this more powerful perfume
of midsummer. Wherever those ashes-of-rose balls hung on their
milky stalks, the air about them was saturated with their breath.
The sky was still red in the west and the evening star hung
directly over the Bergsons' wind-mill. Marie crossed the fence at
the wheatfield corner, and walked slowly along the path that led
to Alexandra's. She could not help feeling hurt that Emil had not
come to tell her about Amedee. It seemed to her most unnatural
that he should not have come. If she were in trouble, certainly
he was the one person in the world she would want to see. Perhaps
he wished her to understand that for her he was as good as gone
already.

Marie stole slowly, flutteringly, along the path, like a white
night-moth out of the fields. The years seemed to stretch before
her like the land; spring, summer, autumn, winter, spring; always
the same patient fields, the patient little trees, the patient lives;
always the same yearning, the same pulling at the chain--until the
instinct to live had torn itself and bled and weakened for the last
time, until the chain secured a dead woman, who might cautiously
be released. Marie walked on, her face lifted toward the remote,
inaccessible evening star.

When she reached the stile she sat down and waited. How terrible
it was to love people when you could not really share their lives!

Yes, in so far as she was concerned, Emil was already gone. They
couldn't meet any more. There was nothing for them to say. They
had spent the last penny of their small change; there was nothing
left but gold. The day of love-tokens was past. They had now
only their hearts to give each other. And Emil being gone, what
was her life to be like ? In some ways, it would be easier. She
would not, at least, live in perpetual fear. If Emil were once
away and settled at work, she would not have the feeling that she
was spoiling his life. With the memory he left her, she could be
as rash as she chose. Nobody could be the worse for it but herself;
and that, surely, did not matter. Her own case was clear. When a
girl had loved one man, and then loved another while that man was
still alive, everybody knew what to think of her. What happened
to her was of little consequence, so long as she did not drag other
people down with her. Emil once away, she could let everything
else go and live a new life of perfect love.

Marie left the stile reluctantly. She had, after all, thought he
might come. And how glad she ought to be, she told herself, that
he was asleep. She left the path and went across the pasture. The
moon was almost full. An owl was hooting somewhere in the fields.
She had scarcely thought about where she was going when the pond
glittered before her, where Emil had shot the ducks. She stopped
and looked at it. Yes, there would be a dirty way out of life, if
one chose to take it. But she did not want to die. She wanted to
live and dream--a hundred years, forever! As long as this sweetness
welled up in her heart, as long as her breast could hold this
treasure of pain! She felt as the pond must feel when it held the
moon like that; when it encircled and swelled with that image of
gold.

In the morning, when Emil came down-stairs, Alexandra met him
in the sitting-room and put her hands on his shoulders. “Emil, I
went to your room as soon as it was light, but you were sleeping
so sound I hated to wake you. There was nothing you could do, so
I let you sleep. They telephoned from Sainte-Agnes that Amedee
died at three o'clock this morning.”




VI

The Church has always held that life is for the living. On Saturday,
while half the village of Sainte-Agnes was mourning for Amedee and
preparing the funeral black for his burial on Monday, the other
half was busy with white dresses and white veils for the great
confirmation service to-morrow, when the bishop was to confirm a
class of one hundred boys and girls. Father Duchesne divided his
time between the living and the dead. All day Saturday the church
was a scene of bustling activity, a little hushed by the thought
of Amedee. The choir were busy rehearsing a mass of Rossini, which
they had studied and practised for this occasion. The women were
trimming the altar, the boys and girls were bringing flowers.

On Sunday morning the bishop was to drive overland to Sainte-Agnes
from Hanover, and Emil Bergson had been asked to take the place of
one of Amedee's cousins in the cavalcade of forty French boys who
were to ride across country to meet the bishop's carriage. At
six o'clock on Sunday morning the boys met at the church. As they
stood holding their horses by the bridle, they talked in low tones
of their dead comrade. They kept repeating that Amedee had always
been a good boy, glancing toward the red brick church which had
played so large a part in Amedee's life, had been the scene of his
most serious moments and of his happiest hours. He had played and
wrestled and sung and courted under its shadow. Only three weeks
ago he had proudly carried his baby there to be christened. They
could not doubt that that invisible arm was still about Amedee; that
through the church on earth he had passed to the church triumphant,
the goal of the hopes and faith of so many hundred years.

When the word was given to mount, the young men rode at a walk out
of the village; but once out among the wheatfields in the morning
sun, their horses and their own youth got the better of them. A
wave of zeal and fiery enthusiasm swept over them. They longed
for a Jerusalem to deliver. The thud of their galloping hoofs
interrupted many a country breakfast and brought many a woman and
child to the door of the farmhouses as they passed. Five miles east
of Sainte-Agnes they met the bishop in his open carriage, attended
by two priests. Like one man the boys swung off their hats in a
broad salute, and bowed their heads as the handsome old man lifted
his two fingers in the episcopal blessing. The horsemen closed
about the carriage like a guard, and whenever a restless horse broke
from control and shot down the road ahead of the body, the bishop
laughed and rubbed his plump hands together. “What fine boys!” he
said to his priests. “The Church still has her cavalry.”

As the troop swept past the graveyard half a mile east of the
town,--the first frame church of the parish had stood there,--old
Pierre Seguin was already out with his pick and spade, digging
Amedee's grave. He knelt and uncovered as the bishop passed. The
boys with one accord looked away from old Pierre to the red church
on the hill, with the gold cross flaming on its steeple.

Mass was at eleven. While the church was filling, Emil Bergson waited
outside, watching the wagons and buggies drive up the hill. After
the bell began to ring, he saw Frank Shabata ride up on horseback
and tie his horse to the hitch-bar. Marie, then, was not coming.
Emil turned and went into the church. Amedee's was the only empty
pew, and he sat down in it. Some of Amedee's cousins were there,
dressed in black and weeping. When all the pews were full, the
old men and boys packed the open space at the back of the church,
kneeling on the floor. There was scarcely a family in town that was
not represented in the confirmation class, by a cousin, at least.
The new communicants, with their clear, reverent faces, were beautiful
to look upon as they entered in a body and took the front benches
reserved for them. Even before the Mass began, the air was charged
with feeling. The choir had never sung so well and Raoul Marcel,
in the “Gloria,” drew even the bishop's eyes to the organ loft.
For the offertory he sang Gounod's “Ave Maria,”--always spoken of
in Sainte-Agnes as “the Ave Maria.”

Emil began to torture himself with questions about Marie. Was she
ill ? Had she quarreled with her husband ? Was she too unhappy to
find comfort even here ? Had she, perhaps, thought that he would
come to her ? Was she waiting for him ? Overtaxed by excitement
and sorrow as he was, the rapture of the service took hold upon his
body and mind. As he listened to Raoul, he seemed to emerge from
the conflicting emotions which had been whirling him about and
sucking him under. He felt as if a clear light broke upon his
mind, and with it a conviction that good was, after all, stronger
than evil, and that good was possible to men. He seemed to discover
that there was a kind of rapture in which he could love forever
without faltering and without sin. He looked across the heads of
the people at Frank Shabata with calmness. That rapture was for those
who could feel it; for people who could not, it was non-existent.
He coveted nothing that was Frank Shabata's. The spirit he had
met in music was his own. Frank Shabata had never found it; would
never find it if he lived beside it a thousand years; would have
destroyed it if he had found it, as Herod slew the innocents, as
Rome slew the martyrs.

SAN--CTA MARI-I-I-A,

wailed Raoul from the organ loft;

O--RA PRO NO-O-BIS!

And it did not occur to Emil that any one had ever reasoned thus
before, that music had ever before given a man this equivocal
revelation.

The confirmation service followed the Mass. When it was over, the
congregation thronged about the newly confirmed. The girls, and
even the boys, were kissed and embraced and wept over. All the
aunts and grandmothers wept with joy. The housewives had much ado
to tear themselves away from the general rejoicing and hurry back
to their kitchens. The country parishioners were staying in town
for dinner, and nearly every house in Sainte-Agnes entertained
visitors that day. Father Duchesne, the bishop, and the visiting
priests dined with Fabien Sauvage, the banker. Emil and Frank
Shabata were both guests of old Moise Marcel. After dinner Frank
and old Moise retired to the rear room of the saloon to play
California Jack and drink their cognac, and Emil went over to the
banker's with Raoul, who had been asked to sing for the bishop.

At three o'clock, Emil felt that he could stand it no longer. He
slipped out under cover of “The Holy City,” followed by Malvina's
wistful eye, and went to the stable for his mare. He was at that
height of excitement from which everything is foreshortened, from
which life seems short and simple, death very near, and the soul
seems to soar like an eagle. As he rode past the graveyard he looked
at the brown hole in the earth where Amedee was to lie, and felt
no horror. That, too, was beautiful, that simple doorway into
forgetfulness. The heart, when it is too much alive, aches for
that brown earth, and ecstasy has no fear of death. It is the old
and the poor and the maimed who shrink from that brown hole; its
wooers are found among the young, the passionate, the gallant-hearted.
It was not until he had passed the graveyard that Emil realized
where he was going. It was the hour for saying good-bye. It might
be the last time that he would see her alone, and today he could
leave her without rancor, without bitterness.

Everywhere the grain stood ripe and the hot afternoon was full of
the smell of the ripe wheat, like the smell of bread baking in an
oven. The breath of the wheat and the sweet clover passed him like
pleasant things in a dream. He could feel nothing but the sense of
diminishing distance. It seemed to him that his mare was flying,
or running on wheels, like a railway train. The sunlight, flashing
on the window-glass of the big red barns, drove him wild with joy.
He was like an arrow shot from the bow. His life poured itself
out along the road before him as he rode to the Shabata farm.

When Emil alighted at the Shabatas' gate, his horse was in a lather.
He tied her in the stable and hurried to the house. It was empty.
She might be at Mrs. Hiller's or with Alexandra. But anything
that reminded him of her would be enough, the orchard, the mulberry
tree... When he reached the orchard the sun was hanging low over
the wheatfield. Long fingers of light reached through the apple
branches as through a net; the orchard was riddled and shot with
gold; light was the reality, the trees were merely interferences
that reflected and refracted light. Emil went softly down between
the cherry trees toward the wheatfield. When he came to the corner,
he stopped short and put his hand over his mouth. Marie was lying
on her side under the white mulberry tree, her face half hidden in
the grass, her eyes closed, her hands lying limply where they had
happened to fall. She had lived a day of her new life of perfect
love, and it had left her like this. Her breast rose and fell
faintly, as if she were asleep. Emil threw himself down beside
her and took her in his arms. The blood came back to her cheeks,
her amber eyes opened slowly, and in them Emil saw his own face
and the orchard and the sun. “I was dreaming this,” she whispered,
hiding her face against him, “don't take my dream away!”




VII

When Frank Shabata got home that night, he found Emil's mare in
his stable. Such an impertinence amazed him. Like everybody else,
Frank had had an exciting day. Since noon he had been drinking too
much, and he was in a bad temper. He talked bitterly to himself
while he put his own horse away, and as he went up the path and
saw that the house was dark he felt an added sense of injury. He
approached quietly and listened on the doorstep. Hearing nothing,
he opened the kitchen door and went softly from one room to another.
Then he went through the house again, upstairs and down, with no
better result. He sat down on the bottom step of the box stairway
and tried to get his wits together. In that unnatural quiet there
was no sound but his own heavy breathing. Suddenly an owl began
to hoot out in the fields. Frank lifted his head. An idea flashed
into his mind, and his sense of injury and outrage grew. He went
into his bedroom and took his murderous 405 Winchester from the
closet.

When Frank took up his gun and walked out of the house, he had not
the faintest purpose of doing anything with it. He did not believe
that he had any real grievance. But it gratified him to feel like
a desperate man. He had got into the habit of seeing himself always
in desperate straits. His unhappy temperament was like a cage; he
could never get out of it; and he felt that other people, his wife
in particular, must have put him there. It had never more than
dimly occurred to Frank that he made his own unhappiness. Though
he took up his gun with dark projects in his mind, he would have
been paralyzed with fright had he known that there was the slightest
probability of his ever carrying any of them out.

Frank went slowly down to the orchard gate, stopped and stood for
a moment lost in thought. He retraced his steps and looked through
the barn and the hayloft. Then he went out to the road, where he
took the foot-path along the outside of the orchard hedge. The
hedge was twice as tall as Frank himself, and so dense that one
could see through it only by peering closely between the leaves.
He could see the empty path a long way in the moonlight. His mind
traveled ahead to the stile, which he always thought of as haunted
by Emil Bergson. But why had he left his horse ?

At the wheatfield corner, where the orchard hedge ended and the
path led across the pasture to the Bergsons', Frank stopped. In
the warm, breathless night air he heard a murmuring sound, perfectly
inarticulate, as low as the sound of water coming from a spring,
where there is no fall, and where there are no stones to fret it.
Frank strained his ears. It ceased. He held his breath and began
to tremble. Resting the butt of his gun on the ground, he parted
the mulberry leaves softly with his fingers and peered through
the hedge at the dark figures on the grass, in the shadow of the
mulberry tree. It seemed to him that they must feel his eyes,
that they must hear him breathing. But they did not. Frank, who
had always wanted to see things blacker than they were, for once
wanted to believe less than he saw. The woman lying in the shadow
might so easily be one of the Bergsons' farm-girls.... Again
the murmur, like water welling out of the ground. This time he
heard it more distinctly, and his blood was quicker than his brain.
He began to act, just as a man who falls into the fire begins to
act. The gun sprang to his shoulder, he sighted mechanically and
fired three times without stopping, stopped without knowing why.
Either he shut his eyes or he had vertigo. He did not see anything
while he was firing. He thought he heard a cry simultaneous with
the second report, but he was not sure. He peered again through
the hedge, at the two dark figures under the tree. They had fallen
a little apart from each other, and were perfectly still--No,
not quite; in a white patch of light, where the moon shone through
the branches, a man's hand was plucking spasmodically at the grass.

Suddenly the woman stirred and uttered a cry, then another, and
another. She was living! She was dragging herself toward the
hedge! Frank dropped his gun and ran back along the path, shaking,
stumbling, gasping. He had never imagined such horror. The
cries followed him. They grew fainter and thicker, as if she were
choking. He dropped on his knees beside the hedge and crouched
like a rabbit, listening; fainter, fainter; a sound like a whine;
again--a moan--another--silence. Frank scrambled to his feet and
ran on, groaning and praying. From habit he went toward the house,
where he was used to being soothed when he had worked himself into
a frenzy, but at the sight of the black, open door, he started back.
He knew that he had murdered somebody, that a woman was bleeding
and moaning in the orchard, but he had not realized before that
it was his wife. The gate stared him in the face. He threw his
hands over his head. Which way to turn ? He lifted his tormented
face and looked at the sky. “Holy Mother of God, not to suffer!
She was a good girl--not to suffer!”

Frank had been wont to see himself in dramatic situations; but
now, when he stood by the windmill, in the bright space between the
barn and the house, facing his own black doorway, he did not see
himself at all. He stood like the hare when the dogs are approaching
from all sides. And he ran like a hare, back and forth about that
moonlit space, before he could make up his mind to go into the
dark stable for a horse. The thought of going into a doorway was
terrible to him. He caught Emil's horse by the bit and led it out.
He could not have buckled a bridle on his own. After two or three
attempts, he lifted himself into the saddle and started for Hanover.
If he could catch the one o'clock train, he had money enough to
get as far as Omaha.

While he was thinking dully of this in some less sensitized part
of his brain, his acuter faculties were going over and over the
cries he had heard in the orchard. Terror was the only thing that
kept him from going back to her, terror that she might still be
she, that she might still be suffering. A woman, mutilated and
bleeding in his orchard--it was because it was a woman that he
was so afraid. It was inconceivable that he should have hurt a
woman. He would rather be eaten by wild beasts than see her move
on the ground as she had moved in the orchard. Why had she been
so careless ? She knew he was like a crazy man when he was angry.
She had more than once taken that gun away from him and held it,
when he was angry with other people. Once it had gone off while
they were struggling over it. She was never afraid. But, when
she knew him, why hadn't she been more careful ? Didn't she have
all summer before her to love Emil Bergson in, without taking such
chances ? Probably she had met the Smirka boy, too, down there in
the orchard. He didn't care. She could have met all the men on the
Divide there, and welcome, if only she hadn't brought this horror
on him.

There was a wrench in Frank's mind. He did not honestly believe that
of her. He knew that he was doing her wrong. He stopped his horse
to admit this to himself the more directly, to think it out the more
clearly. He knew that he was to blame. For three years he had been
trying to break her spirit. She had a way of making the best of
things that seemed to him a sentimental affectation. He wanted his
wife to resent that he was wasting his best years among these stupid
and unappreciative people; but she had seemed to find the people
quite good enough. If he ever got rich he meant to buy her pretty
clothes and take her to California in a Pullman car, and treat her
like a lady; but in the mean time he wanted her to feel that life was
as ugly and as unjust as he felt it. He had tried to make her life
ugly. He had refused to share any of the little pleasures she was so
plucky about making for herself. She could be gay about the least
thing in the world; but she must be gay! When she first came to him,
her faith in him, her adoration--Frank struck the mare with his fist.
Why had Marie made him do this thing; why had she brought this upon
him ? He was overwhelmed by sickening misfortune. All at once he
heard her cries again--he had forgotten for a moment. “Maria,” he
sobbed aloud, “Maria!”

When Frank was halfway to Hanover, the motion of his horse brought
on a violent attack of nausea. After it had passed, he rode on
again, but he could think of nothing except his physical weakness
and his desire to be comforted by his wife. He wanted to get into
his own bed. Had his wife been at home, he would have turned and
gone back to her meekly enough.




VIII

When old Ivar climbed down from his loft at four o'clock the next
morning, he came upon Emil's mare, jaded and lather-stained, her
bridle broken, chewing the scattered tufts of hay outside the stable
door. The old man was thrown into a fright at once. He put the
mare in her stall, threw her a measure of oats, and then set out
as fast as his bow-legs could carry him on the path to the nearest
neighbor.

“Something is wrong with that boy. Some misfortune has come upon
us. He would never have used her so, in his right senses. It is
not his way to abuse his mare,” the old man kept muttering, as he
scuttled through the short, wet pasture grass on his bare feet.

While Ivar was hurrying across the fields, the first long rays of
the sun were reaching down between the orchard boughs to those two
dew-drenched figures. The story of what had happened was written
plainly on the orchard grass, and on the white mulberries that had
fallen in the night and were covered with dark stain. For Emil the
chapter had been short. He was shot in the heart, and had rolled
over on his back and died. His face was turned up to the sky and
his brows were drawn in a frown, as if he had realized that something
had befallen him. But for Marie Shabata it had not been so easy.
One ball had torn through her right lung, another had shattered
the carotid artery. She must have started up and gone toward the
hedge, leaving a trail of blood. There she had fallen and bled.
From that spot there was another trail, heavier than the first,
where she must have dragged herself back to Emil's body. Once
there, she seemed not to have struggled any more. She had lifted
her head to her lover's breast, taken his hand in both her own,
and bled quietly to death. She was lying on her right side in an
easy and natural position, her cheek on Emil's shoulder. On her
face there was a look of ineffable content. Her lips were parted
a little; her eyes were lightly closed, as if in a day-dream or a
light slumber. After she lay down there, she seemed not to have
moved an eyelash. The hand she held was covered with dark stains,
where she had kissed it.

But the stained, slippery grass, the darkened mulberries, told only
half the story. Above Marie and Emil, two white butterflies from
Frank's alfalfa-field were fluttering in and out among the interlacing
shadows; diving and soaring, now close together, now far apart;
and in the long grass by the fence the last wild roses of the year
opened their pink hearts to die.

When Ivar reached the path by the hedge, he saw Shabata's rifle
lying in the way. He turned and peered through the branches,
falling upon his knees as if his legs had been mowed from under
him. “Merciful God!” he groaned.

Alexandra, too, had risen early that morning, because of her anxiety
about Emil. She was in Emil's room upstairs when, from the window,
she saw Ivar coming along the path that led from the Shabatas'.
He was running like a spent man, tottering and lurching from side
to side. Ivar never drank, and Alexandra thought at once that one
of his spells had come upon him, and that he must be in a very bad
way indeed. She ran downstairs and hurried out to meet him, to
hide his infirmity from the eyes of her household. The old man
fell in the road at her feet and caught her hand, over which he
bowed his shaggy head. “Mistress, mistress,” he sobbed, “it has
fallen! Sin and death for the young ones! God have mercy upon
us!”




PART V. Alexandra




I

Ivar was sitting at a cobbler's bench in the barn, mending harness
by the light of a lantern and repeating to himself the 101st Psalm.
It was only five o'clock of a mid-October day, but a storm had
come up in the afternoon, bringing black clouds, a cold wind and
torrents of rain. The old man wore his buffalo-skin coat, and
occasionally stopped to warm his fingers at the lantern. Suddenly
a woman burst into the shed, as if she had been blown in, accompanied by
a shower of rain-drops. It was Signa, wrapped in a man's overcoat
and wearing a pair of boots over her shoes. In time of trouble
Signa had come back to stay with her mistress, for she was the only
one of the maids from whom Alexandra would accept much personal
service. It was three months now since the news of the terrible
thing that had happened in Frank Shabata's orchard had first run
like a fire over the Divide. Signa and Nelse were staying on with
Alexandra until winter.

“Ivar,” Signa exclaimed as she wiped the rain from her face, “do
you know where she is ?”

The old man put down his cobbler's knife. “Who, the mistress ?”

“Yes. She went away about three o'clock. I happened to look out
of the window and saw her going across the fields in her thin dress
and sun-hat. And now this storm has come on. I thought she was
going to Mrs. Hiller's, and I telephoned as soon as the thunder
stopped, but she had not been there. I'm afraid she is out somewhere
and will get her death of cold.”

Ivar put on his cap and took up the lantern. “JA, JA, we will see.
I will hitch the boy's mare to the cart and go.”

Signa followed him across the wagon-shed to the horses' stable.
She was shivering with cold and excitement. “Where do you suppose
she can be, Ivar ?”

The old man lifted a set of single harness carefully from its peg.
“How should I know ?”

“But you think she is at the graveyard, don't you ?” Signa persisted.
“So do I. Oh, I wish she would be more like herself! I can't
believe it's Alexandra Bergson come to this, with no head about
anything. I have to tell her when to eat and when to go to bed.”

“Patience, patience, sister,” muttered Ivar as he settled the bit
in the horse's mouth. “When the eyes of the flesh are shut, the
eyes of the spirit are open. She will have a message from those
who are gone, and that will bring her peace. Until then we must
bear with her. You and I are the only ones who have weight with
her. She trusts us.”

“How awful it's been these last three months.” Signa held the
lantern so that he could see to buckle the straps. “It don't seem
right that we must all be so miserable. Why do we all have to be
punished ? Seems to me like good times would never come again.”

Ivar expressed himself in a deep sigh, but said nothing. He stooped
and took a sandburr from his toe.

“Ivar,” Signa asked suddenly, “will you tell me why you go barefoot ?
All the time I lived here in the house I wanted to ask you. Is it
for a penance, or what ?”

“No, sister. It is for the indulgence of the body. From my youth
up I have had a strong, rebellious body, and have been subject to
every kind of temptation. Even in age my temptations are prolonged.
It was necessary to make some allowances; and the feet, as I
understand it, are free members. There is no divine prohibition
for them in the Ten Commandments. The hands, the tongue, the eyes,
the heart, all the bodily desires we are commanded to subdue; but
the feet are free members. I indulge them without harm to any
one, even to trampling in filth when my desires are low. They are
quickly cleaned again.”

Signa did not laugh. She looked thoughtful as she followed Ivar out
to the wagon-shed and held the shafts up for him, while he backed
in the mare and buckled the hold-backs. “You have been a good
friend to the mistress, Ivar,” she murmured.

“And you, God be with you,” replied Ivar as he clambered into the
cart and put the lantern under the oilcloth lap-cover. “Now for
a ducking, my girl,” he said to the mare, gathering up the reins.

As they emerged from the shed, a stream of water, running off the
thatch, struck the mare on the neck. She tossed her head indignantly,
then struck out bravely on the soft ground, slipping back again and
again as she climbed the hill to the main road. Between the rain
and the darkness Ivar could see very little, so he let Emil's mare
have the rein, keeping her head in the right direction. When the
ground was level, he turned her out of the dirt road upon the sod,
where she was able to trot without slipping.

Before Ivar reached the graveyard, three miles from the house,
the storm had spent itself, and the downpour had died into a soft,
dripping rain. The sky and the land were a dark smoke color, and
seemed to be coming together, like two waves. When Ivar stopped
at the gate and swung out his lantern, a white figure rose from
beside John Bergson's white stone.

The old man sprang to the ground and shuffled toward the gate
calling, “Mistress, mistress!”

Alexandra hurried to meet him and put her hand on his shoulder.
“TYST! Ivar. There's nothing to be worried about. I'm sorry if
I've scared you all. I didn't notice the storm till it was on me,
and I couldn't walk against it. I'm glad you've come. I am so
tired I didn't know how I'd ever get home.”

Ivar swung the lantern up so that it shone in her face. “GUD!
You are enough to frighten us, mistress. You look like a drowned
woman. How could you do such a thing!”

Groaning and mumbling he led her out of the gate and helped her
into the cart, wrapping her in the dry blankets on which he had
been sitting.

Alexandra smiled at his solicitude. “Not much use in that, Ivar.
You will only shut the wet in. I don't feel so cold now; but I'm
heavy and numb. I'm glad you came.”

Ivar turned the mare and urged her into a sliding trot. Her feet
sent back a continual spatter of mud.

Alexandra spoke to the old man as they jogged along through the
sullen gray twilight of the storm. “Ivar, I think it has done me
good to get cold clear through like this, once. I don't believe
I shall suffer so much any more. When you get so near the dead,
they seem more real than the living. Worldly thoughts leave one.
Ever since Emil died, I've suffered so when it rained. Now that
I've been out in it with him, I shan't dread it. After you once
get cold clear through, the feeling of the rain on you is sweet.
It seems to bring back feelings you had when you were a baby. It
carries you back into the dark, before you were born; you can't
see things, but they come to you, somehow, and you know them and
aren't afraid of them. Maybe it's like that with the dead. If
they feel anything at all, it's the old things, before they were
born, that comfort people like the feeling of their own bed does
when they are little.”

“Mistress,” said Ivar reproachfully, “those are bad thoughts. The
dead are in Paradise.”

Then he hung his head, for he did not believe that Emil was in
Paradise.

When they got home, Signa had a fire burning in the sitting-room
stove. She undressed Alexandra and gave her a hot footbath, while
Ivar made ginger tea in the kitchen. When Alexandra was in bed,
wrapped in hot blankets, Ivar came in with his tea and saw that
she drank it. Signa asked permission to sleep on the slat lounge
outside her door. Alexandra endured their attentions patiently,
but she was glad when they put out the lamp and left her. As she
lay alone in the dark, it occurred to her for the first time that
perhaps she was actually tired of life. All the physical operations
of life seemed difficult and painful. She longed to be free from
her own body, which ached and was so heavy. And longing itself
was heavy: she yearned to be free of that.

As she lay with her eyes closed, she had again, more vividly than
for many years, the old illusion of her girlhood, of being lifted
and carried lightly by some one very strong. He was with her
a long while this time, and carried her very far, and in his arms
she felt free from pain. When he laid her down on her bed again,
she opened her eyes, and, for the first time in her life, she saw
him, saw him clearly, though the room was dark, and his face was
covered. He was standing in the doorway of her room. His white
cloak was thrown over his face, and his head was bent a little
forward. His shoulders seemed as strong as the foundations of the
world. His right arm, bared from the elbow, was dark and gleaming,
like bronze, and she knew at once that it was the arm of the
mightiest of all lovers. She knew at last for whom it was she had
waited, and where he would carry her. That, she told herself, was
very well. Then she went to sleep.

Alexandra wakened in the morning with nothing worse than a hard cold
and a stiff shoulder. She kept her bed for several days, and it
was during that time that she formed a resolution to go to Lincoln
to see Frank Shabata. Ever since she last saw him in the courtroom,
Frank's haggard face and wild eyes had haunted her. The trial had
lasted only three days. Frank had given himself up to the police
in Omaha and pleaded guilty of killing without malice and without
premeditation. The gun was, of course, against him, and the judge
had given him the full sentence,--ten years. He had now been in
the State Penitentiary for a month.

Frank was the only one, Alexandra told herself, for whom anything
could be done. He had been less in the wrong than any of them,
and he was paying the heaviest penalty. She often felt that she
herself had been more to blame than poor Frank. From the time the
Shabatas had first moved to the neighboring farm, she had omitted
no opportunity of throwing Marie and Emil together. Because she
knew Frank was surly about doing little things to help his wife,
she was always sending Emil over to spade or plant or carpenter
for Marie. She was glad to have Emil see as much as possible of an
intelligent, city-bred girl like their neighbor; she noticed that
it improved his manners. She knew that Emil was fond of Marie, but
it had never occurred to her that Emil's feeling might be different
from her own. She wondered at herself now, but she had never
thought of danger in that direction. If Marie had been unmarried,--oh,
yes! Then she would have kept her eyes open. But the mere fact that
she was Shabata's wife, for Alexandra, settled everything. That she was
beautiful, impulsive, barely two years older than Emil, these facts had
had no weight with Alexandra. Emil was a good boy, and only bad boys
ran after married women.

Now, Alexandra could in a measure realize that Marie was, after
all, Marie; not merely a “married woman.” Sometimes, when Alexandra
thought of her, it was with an aching tenderness. The moment she
had reached them in the orchard that morning, everything was clear
to her. There was something about those two lying in the grass,
something in the way Marie had settled her cheek on Emil's shoulder,
that told her everything. She wondered then how they could have
helped loving each other; how she could have helped knowing that
they must. Emil's cold, frowning face, the girl's content--Alexandra
had felt awe of them, even in the first shock of her grief.

The idleness of those days in bed, the relaxation of body which
attended them, enabled Alexandra to think more calmly than she had
done since Emil's death. She and Frank, she told herself, were left
out of that group of friends who had been overwhelmed by disaster.
She must certainly see Frank Shabata. Even in the courtroom her
heart had grieved for him. He was in a strange country, he had no
kinsmen or friends, and in a moment he had ruined his life. Being
what he was, she felt, Frank could not have acted otherwise. She
could understand his behavior more easily than she could understand
Marie's. Yes, she must go to Lincoln to see Frank Shabata.

The day after Emil's funeral, Alexandra had written to Carl Linstrum;
a single page of notepaper, a bare statement of what had happened.
She was not a woman who could write much about such a thing, and
about her own feelings she could never write very freely. She knew
that Carl was away from post-offices, prospecting somewhere in the
interior. Before he started he had written her where he expected
to go, but her ideas about Alaska were vague. As the weeks went
by and she heard nothing from him, it seemed to Alexandra that
her heart grew hard against Carl. She began to wonder whether she
would not do better to finish her life alone. What was left of
life seemed unimportant.




II

Late in the afternoon of a brilliant October day, Alexandra Bergson,
dressed in a black suit and traveling-hat, alighted at the Burlington
depot in Lincoln. She drove to the Lindell Hotel, where she had
stayed two years ago when she came up for Emil's Commencement. In
spite of her usual air of sureness and self-possession, Alexandra
felt ill at ease in hotels, and she was glad, when she went to the
clerk's desk to register, that there were not many people in the
lobby. She had her supper early, wearing her hat and black jacket
down to the dining-room and carrying her handbag. After supper
she went out for a walk.

It was growing dark when she reached the university campus. She
did not go into the grounds, but walked slowly up and down the
stone walk outside the long iron fence, looking through at the young
men who were running from one building to another, at the lights
shining from the armory and the library. A squad of cadets were
going through their drill behind the armory, and the commands of
their young officer rang out at regular intervals, so sharp and
quick that Alexandra could not understand them. Two stalwart girls
came down the library steps and out through one of the iron gates.
As they passed her, Alexandra was pleased to hear them speaking
Bohemian to each other. Every few moments a boy would come running
down the flagged walk and dash out into the street as if he were
rushing to announce some wonder to the world. Alexandra felt a
great tenderness for them all. She wished one of them would stop
and speak to her. She wished she could ask them whether they had
known Emil.

As she lingered by the south gate she actually did encounter one
of the boys. He had on his drill cap and was swinging his books
at the end of a long strap. It was dark by this time; he did not
see her and ran against her. He snatched off his cap and stood
bareheaded and panting. “I'm awfully sorry,” he said in a bright,
clear voice, with a rising inflection, as if he expected her to
say something.

“Oh, it was my fault!” said Alexandra eagerly. “Are you an old
student here, may I ask ?”

“No, ma'am. I'm a Freshie, just off the farm. Cherry County.
Were you hunting somebody ?”

“No, thank you. That is--” Alexandra wanted to detain him. “That
is, I would like to find some of my brother's friends. He graduated
two years ago.”

“Then you'd have to try the Seniors, wouldn't you ? Let's see; I
don't know any of them yet, but there'll be sure to be some of them
around the library. That red building, right there,” he pointed.

“Thank you, I'll try there,” said Alexandra lingeringly.

“Oh, that's all right! Good-night.” The lad clapped his cap on
his head and ran straight down Eleventh Street. Alexandra looked
after him wistfully.

She walked back to her hotel unreasonably comforted. “What a nice
voice that boy had, and how polite he was. I know Emil was always
like that to women.” And again, after she had undressed and was
standing in her nightgown, brushing her long, heavy hair by the
electric light, she remembered him and said to herself, “I don't
think I ever heard a nicer voice than that boy had. I hope he
will get on well here. Cherry County; that's where the hay is so
fine, and the coyotes can scratch down to water.”

At nine o'clock the next morning Alexandra presented herself
at the warden's office in the State Penitentiary. The warden was
a German, a ruddy, cheerful-looking man who had formerly been a
harness-maker. Alexandra had a letter to him from the German banker
in Hanover. As he glanced at the letter, Mr. Schwartz put away
his pipe.

“That big Bohemian, is it ? Sure, he's gettin' along fine,” said
Mr. Schwartz cheerfully.

“I am glad to hear that. I was afraid he might be quarrelsome and
get himself into more trouble. Mr. Schwartz, if you have time, I
would like to tell you a little about Frank Shabata, and why I am
interested in him.”

The warden listened genially while she told him briefly something
of Frank's history and character, but he did not seem to find
anything unusual in her account.

“Sure, I'll keep an eye on him. We'll take care of him all right,”
 he said, rising. “You can talk to him here, while I go to see to
things in the kitchen. I'll have him sent in. He ought to be done
washing out his cell by this time. We have to keep 'em clean, you
know.”

The warden paused at the door, speaking back over his shoulder to
a pale young man in convicts' clothes who was seated at a desk in
the corner, writing in a big ledger.

“Bertie, when 1037 is brought in, you just step out and give this
lady a chance to talk.”

The young man bowed his head and bent over his ledger again.

When Mr. Schwartz disappeared, Alexandra thrust her black-edged
handkerchief nervously into her handbag. Coming out on the streetcar
she had not had the least dread of meeting Frank. But since she
had been here the sounds and smells in the corridor, the look of the
men in convicts' clothes who passed the glass door of the warden's
office, affected her unpleasantly.

The warden's clock ticked, the young convict's pen scratched
busily in the big book, and his sharp shoulders were shaken every
few seconds by a loose cough which he tried to smother. It was easy
to see that he was a sick man. Alexandra looked at him timidly,
but he did not once raise his eyes. He wore a white shirt under
his striped jacket, a high collar, and a necktie, very carefully
tied. His hands were thin and white and well cared for, and he had
a seal ring on his little finger. When he heard steps approaching
in the corridor, he rose, blotted his book, put his pen in the rack,
and left the room without raising his eyes. Through the door he
opened a guard came in, bringing Frank Shabata.

“You the lady that wanted to talk to 1037 ? Here he is. Be on your
good behavior, now. He can set down, lady,” seeing that Alexandra
remained standing. “Push that white button when you're through
with him, and I'll come.”

The guard went out and Alexandra and Frank were left alone.

Alexandra tried not to see his hideous clothes. She tried to look
straight into his face, which she could scarcely believe was his.
It was already bleached to a chalky gray. His lips were colorless,
his fine teeth looked yellowish. He glanced at Alexandra sullenly,
blinked as if he had come from a dark place, and one eyebrow twitched
continually. She felt at once that this interview was a terrible
ordeal to him. His shaved head, showing the conformation of his
skull, gave him a criminal look which he had not had during the
trial.

Alexandra held out her hand. “Frank,” she said, her eyes filling
suddenly, “I hope you'll let me be friendly with you. I understand
how you did it. I don't feel hard toward you. They were more to
blame than you.”

Frank jerked a dirty blue handkerchief from his trousers pocket.
He had begun to cry. He turned away from Alexandra. “I never
did mean to do not'ing to dat woman,” he muttered. “I never mean
to do not'ing to dat boy. I ain't had not'ing ag'in' dat boy. I
always like dat boy fine. An' then I find him--” He stopped. The
feeling went out of his face and eyes. He dropped into a chair
and sat looking stolidly at the floor, his hands hanging loosely
between his knees, the handkerchief lying across his striped leg.
He seemed to have stirred up in his mind a disgust that had paralyzed
his faculties.

“I haven't come up here to blame you, Frank. I think they were
more to blame than you.” Alexandra, too, felt benumbed.

Frank looked up suddenly and stared out of the office window. “I
guess dat place all go to hell what I work so hard on,” he said
with a slow, bitter smile. “I not care a damn.” He stopped and
rubbed the palm of his hand over the light bristles on his head
with annoyance. “I no can t'ink without my hair,” he complained.
“I forget English. We not talk here, except swear.”

Alexandra was bewildered. Frank seemed to have undergone a change
of personality. There was scarcely anything by which she could
recognize her handsome Bohemian neighbor. He seemed, somehow, not
altogether human. She did not know what to say to him.

“You do not feel hard to me, Frank ?” she asked at last.

Frank clenched his fist and broke out in excitement. “I not feel
hard at no woman. I tell you I not that kind-a man. I never hit
my wife. No, never I hurt her when she devil me something awful!”
 He struck his fist down on the warden's desk so hard that he
afterward stroked it absently. A pale pink crept over his neck and
face. “Two, t'ree years I know dat woman don' care no more 'bout
me, Alexandra Bergson. I know she after some other man. I know
her, oo-oo! An' I ain't never hurt her. I never would-a done
dat, if I ain't had dat gun along. I don' know what in hell make
me take dat gun. She always say I ain't no man to carry gun. If
she been in dat house, where she ought-a been--But das a foolish
talk.”

Frank rubbed his head and stopped suddenly, as he had stopped
before. Alexandra felt that there was something strange in the way
he chilled off, as if something came up in him that extinguished
his power of feeling or thinking.

“Yes, Frank,” she said kindly. “I know you never meant to hurt
Marie.”

Frank smiled at her queerly. His eyes filled slowly with tears.
“You know, I most forgit dat woman's name. She ain't got no name
for me no more. I never hate my wife, but dat woman what make me
do dat--Honest to God, but I hate her! I no man to fight. I
don' want to kill no boy and no woman. I not care how many men
she take under dat tree. I no care for not'ing but dat fine boy
I kill, Alexandra Bergson. I guess I go crazy sure 'nough.”

Alexandra remembered the little yellow cane she had found in Frank's
clothes-closet. She thought of how he had come to this country a
gay young fellow, so attractive that the prettiest Bohemian girl
in Omaha had run away with him. It seemed unreasonable that life
should have landed him in such a place as this. She blamed Marie
bitterly. And why, with her happy, affectionate nature, should
she have brought destruction and sorrow to all who had loved her,
even to poor old Joe Tovesky, the uncle who used to carry her about
so proudly when she was a little girl ? That was the strangest thing
of all. Was there, then, something wrong in being warm-hearted
and impulsive like that ? Alexandra hated to think so. But there
was Emil, in the Norwegian graveyard at home, and here was Frank
Shabata. Alexandra rose and took him by the hand.

“Frank Shabata, I am never going to stop trying until I get you
pardoned. I'll never give the Governor any peace. I know I can
get you out of this place.”

Frank looked at her distrustfully, but he gathered confidence from
her face. “Alexandra,” he said earnestly, “if I git out-a here,
I not trouble dis country no more. I go back where I come from;
see my mother.”

Alexandra tried to withdraw her hand, but Frank held on to it
nervously. He put out his finger and absently touched a button
on her black jacket. “Alexandra,” he said in a low tone, looking
steadily at the button, “you ain' t'ink I use dat girl awful bad
before--”

“No, Frank. We won't talk about that,” Alexandra said, pressing
his hand. “I can't help Emil now, so I'm going to do what I can
for you. You know I don't go away from home often, and I came up
here on purpose to tell you this.”

The warden at the glass door looked in inquiringly. Alexandra
nodded, and he came in and touched the white button on his desk.
The guard appeared, and with a sinking heart Alexandra saw Frank
led away down the corridor. After a few words with Mr. Schwartz,
she left the prison and made her way to the street-car. She had
refused with horror the warden's cordial invitation to “go through
the institution.” As the car lurched over its uneven roadbed, back
toward Lincoln, Alexandra thought of how she and Frank had been
wrecked by the same storm and of how, although she could come out
into the sunlight, she had not much more left in her life than
he. She remembered some lines from a poem she had liked in her
schooldays:--

   Henceforth the world will only be
   A wider prison-house to me,--

and sighed. A disgust of life weighed upon her heart; some such
feeling as had twice frozen Frank Shabata's features while they
talked together. She wished she were back on the Divide.

When Alexandra entered her hotel, the clerk held up one finger
and beckoned to her. As she approached his desk, he handed her a
telegram. Alexandra took the yellow envelope and looked at it in
perplexity, then stepped into the elevator without opening it. As
she walked down the corridor toward her room, she reflected that
she was, in a manner, immune from evil tidings. On reaching her
room she locked the door, and sitting down on a chair by the dresser,
opened the telegram. It was from Hanover, and it read:--

   Arrived Hanover last night. Shall wait here until you come.
   Please hurry. CARL LINSTRUM.

Alexandra put her head down on the dresser and burst into tears.




III

The next afternoon Carl and Alexandra were walking across the fields
from Mrs. Hiller's. Alexandra had left Lincoln after midnight,
and Carl had met her at the Hanover station early in the morning.
After they reached home, Alexandra had gone over to Mrs. Hiller's
to leave a little present she had bought for her in the city. They
stayed at the old lady's door but a moment, and then came out to
spend the rest of the afternoon in the sunny fields.

Alexandra had taken off her black traveling suit and put on
a white dress; partly because she saw that her black clothes made
Carl uncomfortable and partly because she felt oppressed by them
herself. They seemed a little like the prison where she had worn
them yesterday, and to be out of place in the open fields. Carl
had changed very little. His cheeks were browner and fuller. He
looked less like a tired scholar than when he went away a year ago,
but no one, even now, would have taken him for a man of business.
His soft, lustrous black eyes, his whimsical smile, would be less
against him in the Klondike than on the Divide. There are always
dreamers on the frontier.

Carl and Alexandra had been talking since morning. Her letter had
never reached him. He had first learned of her misfortune from
a San Francisco paper, four weeks old, which he had picked up in
a saloon, and which contained a brief account of Frank Shabata's
trial. When he put down the paper, he had already made up his
mind that he could reach Alexandra as quickly as a letter could;
and ever since he had been on the way; day and night, by the fastest
boats and trains he could catch. His steamer had been held back
two days by rough weather.

As they came out of Mrs. Hiller's garden they took up their talk
again where they had left it.

“But could you come away like that, Carl, without arranging things ?
Could you just walk off and leave your business ?” Alexandra asked.

Carl laughed. “Prudent Alexandra! You see, my dear, I happen to
have an honest partner. I trust him with everything. In fact,
it's been his enterprise from the beginning, you know. I'm in it
only because he took me in. I'll have to go back in the spring.
Perhaps you will want to go with me then. We haven't turned up
millions yet, but we've got a start that's worth following. But
this winter I'd like to spend with you. You won't feel that we
ought to wait longer, on Emil's account, will you, Alexandra ?”

Alexandra shook her head. “No, Carl; I don't feel that way about
it. And surely you needn't mind anything Lou and Oscar say now.
They are much angrier with me about Emil, now, than about you.
They say it was all my fault. That I ruined him by sending him to
college.”

“No, I don't care a button for Lou or Oscar. The moment I knew
you were in trouble, the moment I thought you might need me, it all
looked different. You've always been a triumphant kind of person.”
 Carl hesitated, looking sidewise at her strong, full figure. “But
you do need me now, Alexandra ?”

She put her hand on his arm. “I needed you terribly when it
happened, Carl. I cried for you at night. Then everything seemed
to get hard inside of me, and I thought perhaps I should never care
for you again. But when I got your telegram yesterday, then--then
it was just as it used to be. You are all I have in the world,
you know.”

Carl pressed her hand in silence. They were passing the Shabatas'
empty house now, but they avoided the orchard path and took one
that led over by the pasture pond.

“Can you understand it, Carl ?” Alexandra murmured. “I have had
nobody but Ivar and Signa to talk to. Do talk to me. Can you
understand it ? Could you have believed that of Marie Tovesky ? I
would have been cut to pieces, little by little, before I would
have betrayed her trust in me!”

Carl looked at the shining spot of water before them. “Maybe she
was cut to pieces, too, Alexandra. I am sure she tried hard; they
both did. That was why Emil went to Mexico, of course. And he was
going away again, you tell me, though he had only been home three
weeks. You remember that Sunday when I went with Emil up to
the French Church fair ? I thought that day there was some kind
of feeling, something unusual, between them. I meant to talk to
you about it. But on my way back I met Lou and Oscar and got so
angry that I forgot everything else. You mustn't be hard on them,
Alexandra. Sit down here by the pond a minute. I want to tell
you something.”

They sat down on the grass-tufted bank and Carl told her how he had
seen Emil and Marie out by the pond that morning, more than a year
ago, and how young and charming and full of grace they had seemed
to him. “It happens like that in the world sometimes, Alexandra,”
 he added earnestly. “I've seen it before. There are women who
spread ruin around them through no fault of theirs, just by being
too beautiful, too full of life and love. They can't help it.
People come to them as people go to a warm fire in winter. I used
to feel that in her when she was a little girl. Do you remember
how all the Bohemians crowded round her in the store that day, when
she gave Emil her candy ? You remember those yellow sparks in her
eyes ?”

Alexandra sighed. “Yes. People couldn't help loving her. Poor
Frank does, even now, I think; though he's got himself in such
a tangle that for a long time his love has been bitterer than his
hate. But if you saw there was anything wrong, you ought to have
told me, Carl.”

Carl took her hand and smiled patiently. “My dear, it was something
one felt in the air, as you feel the spring coming, or a storm in
summer. I didn't SEE anything. Simply, when I was with those two
young things, I felt my blood go quicker, I felt--how shall I say
it ?--an acceleration of life. After I got away, it was all too
delicate, too intangible, to write about.”

Alexandra looked at him mournfully. “I try to be more liberal
about such things than I used to be. I try to realize that we are
not all made alike. Only, why couldn't it have been Raoul Marcel,
or Jan Smirka ? Why did it have to be my boy ?”

“Because he was the best there was, I suppose. They were both the
best you had here.”

The sun was dropping low in the west when the two friends rose and
took the path again. The straw-stacks were throwing long shadows,
the owls were flying home to the prairie-dog town. When they came
to the corner where the pastures joined, Alexandra's twelve young
colts were galloping in a drove over the brow of the hill.

“Carl,” said Alexandra, “I should like to go up there with you in
the spring. I haven't been on the water since we crossed the ocean,
when I was a little girl. After we first came out here I used
to dream sometimes about the shipyard where father worked, and a
little sort of inlet, full of masts.” Alexandra paused. After a
moment's thought she said, “But you would never ask me to go away
for good, would you ?”

“Of course not, my dearest. I think I know how you feel about this
country as well as you do yourself.” Carl took her hand in both
his own and pressed it tenderly.

“Yes, I still feel that way, though Emil is gone. When I was on
the train this morning, and we got near Hanover, I felt something
like I did when I drove back with Emil from the river that time,
in the dry year. I was glad to come back to it. I've lived here
a long time. There is great peace here, Carl, and freedom....
I thought when I came out of that prison, where poor Frank is,
that I should never feel free again. But I do, here.” Alexandra
took a deep breath and looked off into the red west.

“You belong to the land,” Carl murmured, “as you have always said.
Now more than ever.”

“Yes, now more than ever. You remember what you once said about
the graveyard, and the old story writing itself over ? Only it is
we who write it, with the best we have.”

They paused on the last ridge of the pasture, overlooking the
house and the windmill and the stables that marked the site of John
Bergson's homestead. On every side the brown waves of the earth
rolled away to meet the sky.

“Lou and Oscar can't see those things,” said Alexandra suddenly.
“Suppose I do will my land to their children, what difference will
that make ? The land belongs to the future, Carl; that's the way
it seems to me. How many of the names on the county clerk's plat
will be there in fifty years ? I might as well try to will the
sunset over there to my brother's children. We come and go, but
the land is always here. And the people who love it and understand
it are the people who own it--for a little while.”

Carl looked at her wonderingly. She was still gazing into the west,
and in her face there was that exalted serenity that sometimes came
to her at moments of deep feeling. The level rays of the sinking
sun shone in her clear eyes.

“Why are you thinking of such things now, Alexandra ?”

“I had a dream before I went to Lincoln--But I will tell you about
that afterward, after we are married. It will never come true,
now, in the way I thought it might.” She took Carl's arm and they
walked toward the gate. “How many times we have walked this path
together, Carl. How many times we will walk it again! Does it seem
to you like coming back to your own place ? Do you feel at peace
with the world here ? I think we shall be very happy. I haven't
any fears. I think when friends marry, they are safe. We don't
suffer like--those young ones.” Alexandra ended with a sigh.

They had reached the gate. Before Carl opened it, he drew Alexandra
to him and kissed her softly, on her lips and on her eyes.

She leaned heavily on his shoulder. “I am tired,” she murmured.
“I have been very lonely, Carl.”

They went into the house together, leaving the Divide behind them,
under the evening star. Fortunate country, that is one day to
receive hearts like Alexandra's into its bosom, to give them out
again in the yellow wheat, in the rustling corn, in the shining
eyes of youth!

On Lovely Creek

I.

Claude Wheeler opened his eyes before the sun was up and
vigorously shook his younger brother, who lay in the other half
of the same bed.

"Ralph, Ralph, get awake! Come down and help me wash the car."

"What for ?"

"Why, aren't we going to the circus today ?"

"Car's all right. Let me alone." The boy turned over and pulled
the sheet up to his face, to shut out the light which was
beginning to come through the curtainless windows.

Claude rose and dressed,--a simple operation which took very
little time. He crept down two flights of stairs, feeling his way
in the dusk, his red hair standing up in peaks, like a cock's
comb. He went through the kitchen into the adjoining washroom,
which held two porcelain stands with running water. Everybody had
washed before going to bed, apparently, and the bowls were ringed
with a dark sediment which the hard, alkaline water had not
dissolved. Shutting the door on this disorder, he turned back to
the kitchen, took Mahailey's tin basin, doused his face and head
in cold water, and began to plaster down his wet hair.

Old Mahailey herself came in from the yard, with her apron full
of corn-cobs to start a fire in the kitchen stove. She smiled at
him in the foolish fond way she often had with him when they were
alone.

"What air you gittin' up for a-ready, boy ? You goin' to the
circus before breakfast ? Don't you make no noise, else you'll
have 'em all down here before I git my fire a-goin'."

"All right, Mahailey." Claude caught up his cap and ran out of
doors, down the hillside toward the barn. The sun popped up over
the edge of the prairie like a broad, smiling face; the light
poured across the close-cropped August pastures and the hilly,
timbered windings of Lovely Creek, a clear little stream with a
sand bottom, that curled and twisted playfully about through the
south section of the big Wheeler ranch. It was a fine day to go
to the circus at Frankfort, a fine day to do anything; the sort
of day that must, somehow, turn out well.

Claude backed the little Ford car out of its shed, ran it up to
the horse-tank, and began to throw water on the mud-crusted
wheels and windshield. While he was at work the two hired men,
Dan and Jerry, came shambling down the hill to feed the stock.
Jerry was grumbling and swearing about something, but Claude
wrung out his wet rags and, beyond a nod, paid no attention to
them. Somehow his father always managed to have the roughest and
dirtiest hired men in the country working for him. Claude had a
grievance against Jerry just now, because of his treatment of one
of the horses.

Molly was a faithful old mare, the mother of many colts; Claude
and his younger brother had learned to ride on her. This man
Jerry, taking her out to work one morning, let her step on a
board with a nail sticking up in it. He pulled the nail out of
her foot, said nothing to anybody, and drove her to the
cultivator all day. Now she had been standing in her stall for
weeks, patiently suffering, her body wretchedly thin, and her leg
swollen until it looked like an elephant's. She would have to
stand there, the veterinary said, until her hoof came off and she
grew a new one, and she would always be stiff. Jerry had not been
discharged, and he exhibited the poor animal as if she were a
credit to him.

Mahailey came out on the hilltop and rang the breakfast bell.
After the hired men went up to the house, Claude slipped into the
barn to see that Molly had got her share of oats. She was eating
quietly, her head hanging, and her scaly, dead-looking foot
lifted just a little from the ground. When he stroked her neck
and talked to her she stopped grinding and gazed at him
mournfully. She knew him, and wrinkled her nose and drew her
upper lip back from her worn teeth, to show that she liked being
petted. She let him touch her foot and examine her leg.

When Claude reached the kitchen, his mother was sitting at one
end of the breakfast table, pouring weak coffee, his brother and
Dan and Jerry were in their chairs, and Mahailey was baking
griddle cakes at the stove. A moment later Mr. Wheeler came down
the enclosed stairway and walked the length of the table to his
own place. He was a very large man, taller and broader than any
of his neighbours. He seldom wore a coat in summer, and his
rumpled shirt bulged out carelessly over the belt of his
trousers. His florid face was clean shaven, likely to be a trifle
tobacco-stained about the mouth, and it was conspicuous both for
good-nature and coarse humour, and for an imperturbable physical
composure. Nobody in the county had ever seen Nat Wheeler
flustered about anything, and nobody had ever heard him speak
with complete seriousness. He kept up his easy-going, jocular
affability even with his own family.

As soon as he was seated, Mr. Wheeler reached for the two-pint
sugar bowl and began to pour sugar into his coffee. Ralph asked
him if he were going to the circus. Mr. Wheeler winked.

"I shouldn't wonder if I happened in town sometime before the
elephants get away." He spoke very deliberately, with a
State-of-Maine drawl, and his voice was smooth and agreeable.
"You boys better start in early, though. You can take the wagon
and the mules, and load in the cowhides. The butcher has agreed
to take them."

Claude put down his knife. "Can't we have the car ? I've washed it
on purpose."

"And what about Dan and Jerry ? They want to see the circus just
as much as you do, and I want the hides should go in; they're
bringing a good price now. I don't mind about your washing the
car; mud preserves the paint, they say, but it'll be all right
this time, Claude."

The hired men haw-hawed and Ralph giggled. Claude's freckled face
got very red. The pancake grew stiff and heavy in his mouth and
was hard to swallow. His father knew he hated to drive the mules
to town, and knew how he hated to go anywhere with Dan and Jerry.
As for the hides, they were the skins of four steers that had
perished in the blizzard last winter through the wanton
carelessness of these same hired men, and the price they would
bring would not half pay for the time his father had spent in
stripping and curing them. They had lain in a shed loft all
summer, and the wagon had been to town a dozen times. But today,
when he wanted to go to Frankfort clean and care-free, he must
take these stinking hides and two coarse-mouthed men, and drive a
pair of mules that always brayed and balked and behaved
ridiculously in a crowd. Probably his father had looked out of
the window and seen him washing the car, and had put this up on
him while he dressed. It was like his father's idea of a joke.

Mrs. Wheeler looked at Claude sympathetically, feeling that he
was disappointed. Perhaps she, too, suspected a joke. She had
learned that humour might wear almost any guise.

When Claude started for the barn after breakfast, she came
running down the path, calling to him faintly,--hurrying always
made her short of breath. Overtaking him, she looked up with
solicitude, shading her eyes with her delicately formed hand. "If
you want I should do up your linen coat, Claude, I can iron it
while you're hitching," she said wistfully.

Claude stood kicking at a bunch of mottled feathers that had once
been a young chicken. His shoulders were drawn high, his mother
saw, and his figure suggested energy and determined self-control.

"You needn't mind, mother." He spoke rapidly, muttering his
words. "I'd better wear my old clothes if I have to take the
hides. They're greasy, and in the sun they'll smell worse than
fertilizer."

"The men can handle the hides, I should think. Wouldn't you feel
better in town to be dressed ?" She was still blinking up at him.

"Don't bother about it. Put me out a clean coloured shirt, if you
want to. That's all right."

He turned toward the barn, and his mother went slowly back the
path up to the house. She was so plucky and so stooped, his dear
mother! He guessed if she could stand having these men about,
could cook and wash for them, he could drive them to town!

Half an hour after the wagon left, Nat Wheeler put on an alpaca
coat and went off in the rattling buckboard in which, though he
kept two automobiles, he still drove about the country. He said
nothing to his wife; it was her business to guess whether or not
he would be home for dinner. She and Mahailey could have a good
time scrubbing and sweeping all day, with no men around to bother
them.



There were few days in the year when Wheeler did not drive off
somewhere; to an auction sale, or a political convention, or a
meeting of the Farmers' Telephone directors;--to see how his
neighbours were getting on with their work, if there was nothing
else to look after. He preferred his buckboard to a car because
it was light, went easily over heavy or rough roads, and was so
rickety that he never felt he must suggest his wife's
accompanying him. Besides he could see the country better when he
didn't have to keep his mind on the road. He had come to this
part of Nebraska when the Indians and the buffalo were still
about, remembered the grasshopper year and the big cyclone, had
watched the farms emerge one by one from the great rolling page
where once only the wind wrote its story. He had encouraged new
settlers to take up homesteads, urged on courtships, lent young
fellows the money to marry on, seen families grow and prosper;
until he felt a little as if all this were his own enterprise.
The changes, not only those the years made, but those the seasons
made, were interesting to him.

People recognized Nat Wheeler and his cart a mile away. He sat
massive and comfortable, weighing down one end of the slanting
seat, his driving hand lying on his knee. Even his German
neighbours, the Yoeders, who hated to stop work for a quarter of
an hour on any account, were glad to see him coming. The
merchants in the little towns about the county missed him if he
didn't drop in once a week or so. He was active in politics;
never ran for an office himself, but often took up the cause of a
friend and conducted his campaign for him.

The French saying, "Joy of the street, sorrow of the home," was
exemplified in Mr. Wheeler, though not at all in the French way.
His own affairs were of secondary importance to him. In the early
days he had homesteaded and bought and leased enough land to make
him rich. Now he had only to rent it out to good farmers who
liked to work--he didn't, and of that he made no secret. When he
was at home, he usually sat upstairs in the living room, reading
newspapers. He subscribed for a dozen or more--the list included
a weekly devoted to scandal--and he was well informed about what
was going on in the world. He had magnificent health, and illness
in himself or in other people struck him as humorous. To be sure,
he never suffered from anything more perplexing than toothache or
boils, or an occasional bilious attack.

Wheeler gave liberally to churches and charities, was always
ready to lend money or machinery to a neighbour who was short of
anything. He liked to tease and shock diffident people, and had
an inexhaustible supply of funny stories. Everybody marveled that
he got on so well with his oldest son, Bayliss Wheeler. Not that
Bayliss was exactly diffident, but he was a narrow gauge fellow,
the sort of prudent young man one wouldn't expect Nat Wheeler to
like.

Bayliss had a farm implement business in Frankfort, and though he
was still under thirty he had made a very considerable financial
success. Perhaps Wheeler was proud of his son's business acumen.
At any rate, he drove to town to see Bayliss several times a
week, went to sales and stock exhibits with him, and sat about
his store for hours at a stretch, joking with the farmers who
came in. Wheeler had been a heavy drinker in his day, and was
still a heavy feeder. Bayliss was thin and dyspeptic, and a
virulent Prohibitionist; he would have liked to regulate
everybody's diet by his own feeble constitution. Even Mrs.
Wheeler, who took the men God had apportioned her for granted,
wondered how Bayliss and his father could go off to conventions
together and have a good time, since their ideas of what made a
good time were so different.

Once every few years, Mr. Wheeler bought a new suit and a dozen
stiff shirts and went back to Maine to visit his brothers and
sisters, who were very quiet, conventional people. But he was
always glad to get home to his old clothes, his big farm, his
buckboard, and Bayliss.

Mrs. Wheeler had come out from Vermont to be Principal of the
High School, when Frankfort was a frontier town and Nat Wheeler
was a prosperous bachelor. He must have fancied her for the same
reason he liked his son Bayliss, because she was so different.
There was this to be said for Nat Wheeler, that he liked every
sort of human creature; he liked good people and honest people,
and he liked rascals and hypocrites almost to the point of loving
them. If he heard that a neighbour had played a sharp trick or
done something particularly mean, he was sure to drive over to
see the man at once, as if he hadn't hitherto appreciated him.

There was a large, loafing dignity about Claude's father. He
liked to provoke others to uncouth laughter, but he never laughed
immoderately himself. In telling stories about him, people often
tried to imitate his smooth, senatorial voice, robust but never
loud. Even when he was hilariously delighted by anything,--as
when poor Mahailey, undressing in the dark on a summer night, sat
down on the sticky fly-paper,--he was not boisterous. He was a
jolly, easy-going father, indeed, for a boy who was not
thin-skinned.



II

Claude and his mules rattled into Frankfort just as the calliope
went screaming down Main street at the head of the circus parade.
Getting rid of his disagreeable freight and his uncongenial
companions as soon as possible, he elbowed his way along the
crowded sidewalk, looking for some of the neighbour boys. Mr.
Wheeler was standing on the Farmer's Bank corner, towering a head
above the throng, chaffing with a little hunchback who was
setting up a shell-game. To avoid his father, Claude turned and
went in to his brother's store. The two big show windows were
full of country children, their mothers standing behind them to
watch the parade. Bayliss was seated in the little glass cage
where he did his writing and bookkeeping. He nodded at Claude
from his desk.

"Hello," said Claude, bustling in as if he were in a great hurry.
"Have you seen Ernest Havel ? I thought I might find him in here."

Bayliss swung round in his swivel chair to return a plough
catalogue to the shelf. "What would he be in here for ? Better
look for him in the saloon." Nobody could put meaner insinuations
into a slow, dry remark than Bayliss.

Claude's cheeks flamed with anger. As he turned away, he noticed
something unusual about his brother's face, but he wasn't going
to give him the satisfaction of asking him how he had got a black
eye. Ernest Havel was a Bohemian, and he usually drank a glass of
beer when he came to town; but he was sober and thoughtful beyond
the wont of young men. From Bayliss' drawl one might have
supposed that the boy was a drunken loafer.

At that very moment Claude saw his friend on the other side of
the street, following the wagon of trained dogs that brought up
the rear of the procession. He ran across, through a crowd of
shouting youngsters, and caught Ernest by the arm.

"Hello, where are you off to ?"

"I'm going to eat my lunch before show-time. I left my wagon out
by the pumping station, on the creek. What about you ?"

"I've got no program. Can I go along ?"

Ernest smiled. "I expect. I've got enough lunch for two."

"Yes, I know. You always have. I'll join you later."

Claude would have liked to take Ernest to the hotel for dinner.
He had more than enough money in his pockets; and his father was
a rich farmer. In the Wheeler family a new thrasher or a new
automobile was ordered without a question, but it was considered
extravagant to go to a hotel for dinner. If his father or Bayliss
heard that he had been there-and Bayliss heard everything they
would say he was putting on airs, and would get back at him. He
tried to excuse his cowardice to himself by saying that he was
dirty and smelled of the hides; but in his heart he knew that he
did not ask Ernest to go to the hotel with him because he had
been so brought up that it would be difficult for him to do this
simple thing. He made some purchases at the fruit stand and the
cigar counter, and then hurried out along the dusty road toward
the pumping station. Ernest's wagon was standing under the shade
of some willow trees, on a little sandy bottom half enclosed by a
loop of the creek which curved like a horseshoe. Claude threw
himself on the sand beside the stream and wiped the dust from his
hot face. He felt he had now closed the door on his disagreeable
morning.

Ernest produced his lunch basket.

"I got a couple bottles of beer cooling in the creek," he said.
"I knew you wouldn't want to go in a saloon."

"Oh, forget it!" Claude muttered, ripping the cover off a jar of
pickles. He was nineteen years old, and he was afraid to go into
a saloon, and his friend knew he was afraid.

After lunch, Claude took out a handful of good cigars he had
bought at the drugstore. Ernest, who couldn't afford cigars, was
pleased. He lit one, and as he smoked he kept looking at it with
an air of pride and turning it around between his fingers.

The horses stood with their heads over the wagon-box, munching
their oats. The stream trickled by under the willow roots with a
cool, persuasive sound. Claude and Ernest lay in the shade, their
coats under their heads, talking very little. Occasionally a
motor dashed along the road toward town, and a cloud of dust and
a smell of gasoline blew in over the creek bottom; but for the
most part the silence of the warm, lazy summer noon was
undisturbed. Claude could usually forget his own vexations and
chagrins when he was with Ernest. The Bohemian boy was never
uncertain, was not pulled in two or three ways at once. He was
simple and direct. He had a number of impersonal preoccupations;
was interested in politics and history and in new inventions.
Claude felt that his friend lived in an atmosphere of mental
liberty to which he himself could never hope to attain. After he
had talked with Ernest for awhile, the things that did not go
right on the farm seemed less important. Claude's mother was
almost as fond of Ernest as he was himself. When the two boys
were going to high school, Ernest often came over in the evening
to study with Claude, and while they worked at the long kitchen
table Mrs. Wheeler brought her darning and sat near them, helping
them with their Latin and algebra. Even old Mahailey was
enlightened by their words of wisdom.

Mrs. Wheeler said she would never forget the night Ernest arrived
from the Old Country. His brother, Joe Havel, had gone to
Frankfort to meet him, and was to stop on the way home and leave
some groceries for the Wheelers. The train from the east was
late; it was ten o'clock that night when Mrs. Wheeler, waiting in
the kitchen, heard Havel's wagon rumble across the little bridge
over Lovely Creek. She opened the outside door, and presently Joe
came in with a bucket of salt fish in one hand and a sack of
flour on his shoulder. While he took the fish down to the cellar
for her, another figure appeared in the doorway; a young boy,
short, stooped, with a flat cap on his head and a great oilcloth
valise, such as pedlars carry, strapped to his back. He had
fallen asleep in the wagon, and on waking and finding his brother
gone, he had supposed they were at home and scrambled for his
pack. He stood in the doorway, blinking his eyes at the light,
looking astonished but eager to do whatever was required of him.
What if one of her own boys, Mrs. Wheeler thought.... She
went up to him and put her arm around him, laughing a little and
saying in her quiet voice, just as if he could understand her,
"Why, you're only a little boy after all, aren't you ?"

Ernest said afterwards that it was his first welcome to this
country, though he had travelled so far, and had been pushed and
hauled and shouted at for so many days, he had lost count of
them. That night he and Claude only shook hands and looked at
each other suspiciously, but ever since they had been good
friends.

After their picnic the two boys went to the circus in a happy
frame of mind. In the animal tent they met big Leonard Dawson,
the oldest son of one of the Wheelers' near neighbours, and the
three sat together for the performance. Leonard said he had come
to town alone in his car; wouldn't Claude ride out with him ?
Claude was glad enough to turn the mules over to Ralph, who
didn't mind the hired men as much as he did.

Leonard was a strapping brown fellow of twenty-five, with big
hands and big feet, white teeth, and flashing eyes full of
energy. He and his father and two brothers not only worked their
own big farm, but rented a quarter section from Nat Wheeler. They
were master farmers. If there was a dry summer and a failure,
Leonard only laughed and stretched his long arms, and put in a
bigger crop next year. Claude was always a little reserved with
Leonard; he felt that the young man was rather contemptuous of
the hap-hazard way in which things were done on the Wheeler
place, and thought his going to college a waste of money. Leonard
had not even gone through the Frankfort High School, and he was
already a more successful man than Claude was ever likely to be.
Leonard did think these things, but he was fond of Claude, all
the same.

At sunset the car was speeding over a fine stretch of smooth road
across the level country that lay between Frankfort and the
rougher land along Lovely Creek. Leonard's attention was largely
given up to admiring the faultless behaviour of his engine.
Presently he chuckled to himself and turned to Claude.

"I wonder if you'd take it all right if I told you a joke on
Bayliss ?"

"I expect I would." Claude's tone was not at all eager.

"You saw Bayliss today ? Notice anything queer about him, one eye
a little off colour ? Did he tell you how he got it ?"

"No. I didn't ask him."

"Just as well. A lot of people did ask him, though, and he said
he was hunting around his place for something in the dark and ran
into a reaper. Well, I'm the reaper!"

Claude looked interested. "You mean to say Bayliss was in a
fight ?"

Leonard laughed. "Lord, no! Don't you know Bayliss ? I went in
there to pay a bill yesterday, and Susie Gray and another girl
came in to sell tickets for the firemen's dinner. An advance man
for this circus was hanging around, and he began talking a little
smart,--nothing rough, but the way such fellows will. The girls
handed it back to him, and sold him three tickets and shut him
up. I couldn't see how Susie thought so quick what to say. The
minute the girls went out Bayliss started knocking them; said all
the country girls were getting too fresh and knew more than they
ought to about managing sporty men and right there I reached out
and handed him one. I hit harder than I meant to. I meant to slap
him, not to give him a black eye. But you can't always regulate
things, and I was hot all over. I waited for him to come back at
me. I'm bigger than he is, and I wanted to give him satisfaction.
Well, sir, he never moved a muscle! He stood there getting redder
and redder, and his eyes watered. I don't say he cried, but his
eyes watered. 'All right, Bayliss,' said I. 'Slow with your
fists, if that's your principle; but slow with your tongue,
too,--especially when the parties mentioned aren't present.'"

"Bayliss will never get over that," was Claude's only comment.

"He don't have to!" Leonard threw up his head. "I'm a good
customer; he can like it or lump it, till the price of binding
twine goes down!"

For the next few minutes the driver was occupied with trying to
get up a long, rough hill on high gear. Sometimes he could
make that hill, and sometimes he couldn't, and he was not able to
account for the difference. After he pulled the second lever with
some disgust and let the car amble on as she would, he noticed
that his companion was disconcerted.

"I'll tell you what, Leonard," Claude spoke in a strained voice,
"I think the fair thing for you to do is to get out here by the
road and give me a chance."

Leonard swung his steering wheel savagely to pass a wagon on the
down side of the hill. "What the devil are you talking about,
boy ?"

"You think you've got our measure all right, but you ought to
give me a chance first."

Leonard looked down in amazement at his own big brown hands,
lying on the wheel. "You mortal fool kid, what would I be telling
you all this for, if I didn't know you were another breed of
cats ? I never thought you got on too well with Bayliss yourself."

"I don't, but I won't have you thinking you can slap the men in
my family whenever you feel like it." Claude knew that his
explanation sounded foolish, and his voice, in spite of all he
could do, was weak and angry.

Young Leonard Dawson saw he had hurt the boy's feelings. "Lord,
Claude, I know you're a fighter. Bayliss never was. I went to
school with him."

The ride ended amicably, but Claude wouldn't let Leonard take him
home. He jumped out of the car with a curt goodnight, and ran
across the dusky fields toward the light that shone from the
house on the hill. At the little bridge over the creek, he
stopped to get his breath and to be sure that he was outwardly
composed before he went in to see his mother.

"Ran against a reaper in the dark!" he muttered aloud, clenching
his fist.

Listening to the deep singing of the frogs, and to the distant
barking of the dogs up at the house, he grew calmer.
Nevertheless, he wondered why it was that one had sometimes to
feel responsible for the behaviour of people whose natures were
wholly antipathetic to one's own.



III

The circus was on Saturday. The next morning Claude was standing
at his dresser, shaving. His beard was already strong, a shade
darker than his hair and not so red as his skin. His eyebrows and
long lashes were a pale corn-colour--made his blue eyes seem
lighter than they were, and, he thought, gave a look of shyness
and weakness to the upper part of his face. He was exactly the
sort of looking boy he didn't want to be. He especially hated his
head,--so big that he had trouble in buying his hats, and
uncompromisingly square in shape; a perfect block-head. His name
was another source of humiliation. Claude: it was a "chump" name,
like Elmer and Roy; a hayseed name trying to be fine. In country
schools there was always a red-headed, warty-handed, runny-nosed
little boy who was called Claude. His good physique he took for
granted; smooth, muscular arms and legs, and strong shoulders, a
farmer boy might be supposed to have. Unfortunately he had none
of his father's physical repose, and his strength often asserted
itself inharmoniously. The storms that went on in his mind
sometimes made him rise, or sit down, or lift something, more
violently than there was any apparent reason for his doing.

The household slept late on Sunday morning; even Mahailey did not
get up until seven. The general signal for breakfast was the
smell of doughnuts frying. This morning Ralph rolled out of bed
at the last minute and callously put on his clean underwear
without taking a bath. This cost him not one regret, though he
took time to polish his new ox-blood shoes tenderly with a pocket
handkerchief. He reached the table when all the others were half
through breakfast, and made his peace by genially asking his
mother if she didn't want him to drive her to church in the car.

"I'd like to go if I can get the work done in time," she said,
doubtfully glancing at the clock.

"Can't Mahailey tend to things for you this morning ?"

Mrs. Wheeler hesitated. "Everything but the separator, she can.
But she can't fit all the parts together. It's a good deal of
work, you know."

"Now, Mother," said Ralph good-humouredly, as he emptied the
syrup pitcher over his cakes, "you're prejudiced. Nobody ever
thinks of skimming milk now-a-days. Every up-to-date farmer uses
a separator."

Mrs. Wheeler's pale eyes twinkled. "Mahailey and I will never be
quite up-to-date, Ralph. We're old-fashioned, and I don't know but
you'd better let us be. I could see the advantage of a separator
if we milked half-a-dozen cows. It's a very ingenious machine.
But it's a great deal more work to scald it and fit it together
than it was to take care of the milk in the old way."

"It won't be when you get used to it," Ralph assured her. He was
the chief mechanic of the Wheeler farm, and when the farm
implements and the automobiles did not give him enough to do, he
went to town and bought machines for the house. As soon as
Mahailey got used to a washing-machine or a churn, Ralph, to keep
up with the bristling march of invention, brought home a still
newer one. The mechanical dish-washer she had never been able to
use, and patent flat-irons and oil-stoves drove her wild.

Claude told his mother to go upstairs and dress; he would scald
the separator while Ralph got the car ready. He was still working
at it when his brother came in from the garage to wash his hands.

"You really oughtn't to load mother up with things like this,
Ralph," he exclaimed fretfully. "Did you ever try washing this
damned thing yourself ?"

"Of course I have. If Mrs. Dawson can manage it, I should think
mother could."

"Mrs. Dawson is a younger woman. Anyhow, there's no point in
trying to make machinists of Mahailey and mother."

Ralph lifted his eyebrows to excuse Claude's bluntness. "See
here," he said persuasively, "don't you go encouraging her into
thinking she can't change her ways. Mother's entitled to all the
labour-saving devices we can get her."

Claude rattled the thirty-odd graduated metal funnels which he
was trying to fit together in their proper sequence. "Well, if
this is labour-saving"

The younger boy giggled and ran upstairs for his panama hat. He
never quarrelled. Mrs. Wheeler sometimes said it was wonderful,
how much Ralph would take from Claude.

After Ralph and his mother had gone off in the car, Mr. Wheeler
drove to see his German neighbour, Gus Yoeder, who had just
bought a blooded bull. Dan and Jerry were pitching horseshoes
down behind the barn. Claude told Mahailey he was going to the
cellar to put up the swinging shelf she had been wanting, so that
the rats couldn't get at her vegetables.

"Thank you, Mr. Claude. I don't know what does make the rats so
bad. The cats catches one most every day, too."

"I guess they come up from the barn. I've got a nice wide board
down at the garage for your shelf." The cellar was cemented, cool
and dry, with deep closets for canned fruit and flour and
groceries, bins for coal and cobs, and a dark-room full of
photographer's apparatus. Claude took his place at the
carpenter's bench under one of the square windows. Mysterious
objects stood about him in the grey twilight; electric batteries,
old bicycles and typewriters, a machine for making cement
fence-posts, a vulcanizer, a stereopticon with a broken lens. The
mechanical toys Ralph could not operate successfully, as well as
those he had got tired of, were stored away here. If they were
left in the barn, Mr. Wheeler saw them too often, and sometimes,
when they happened to be in his way, he made sarcastic comments.
Claude had begged his mother to let him pile this lumber into a
wagon and dump it into some washout hole along the creek; but
Mrs. Wheeler said he must not think of such a thing; it would
hurt Ralph's feelings. Nearly every time Claude went into the
cellar, he made a desperate resolve to clear the place out some
day, reflecting bitterly that the money this wreckage cost would
have put a boy through college decently.

While Claude was planing off the board he meant to suspend from
the joists, Mahailey left her work and came down to watch him.
She made some pretence of hunting for pickled onions, then seated
herself upon a cracker box; close at hand there was a plush
"spring-rocker" with one arm gone, but it wouldn't have been her
idea of good manners to sit there. Her eyes had a kind of sleepy
contentment in them as she followed Claude's motions. She watched
him as if he were a baby playing. Her hands lay comfortably in
her lap.

"Mr. Ernest ain't been over for a long time. He ain't mad about
nothin', is he ?"

"Oh, no! He's awful busy this summer. I saw him in town
yesterday. We went to the circus together."

Mahailey smiled and nodded. "That's nice. I'm glad for you two
boys to have a good time. Mr. Ernest's a nice boy; I always liked
him first rate. He's a little feller, though. He ain't big like
you, is he ? I guess he ain't as tall as Mr. Ralph, even."

"Not quite," said Claude between strokes. "He's strong, though,
and gets through a lot of work."

"Oh, I know! I know he is. I know he works hard. All them
foreigners works hard, don't they, Mr. Claude ? I reckon he liked
the circus. Maybe they don't have circuses like our'n, over where
he come from."

Claude began to tell her about the clown elephant and the trained
dogs, and she sat listening to him with her pleased, foolish
smile; there was something wise and far-seeing about her smile,
too.

Mahailey had come to them long ago, when Claude was only a few
months old. She had been brought West by a shiftless Virginia
family which went to pieces and scattered under the rigours of
pioneer farm-life. When the mother of the family died, there was
nowhere for Mahailey to go, and Mrs. Wheeler took her in.
Mahailey had no one to take care of her, and Mrs. Wheeler had no
one to help her with the work; it had turned out very well.

Mahailey had had a hard life in her young days, married to a
savage mountaineer who often abused her and never provided for
her. She could remember times when she sat in the cabin, beside
an empty meal-barrel and a cold iron pot, waiting for "him" to
bring home a squirrel he had shot or a chicken he had stolen. Too
often he brought nothing but a jug of mountain whiskey and a pair
of brutal fists. She thought herself well off now, never to have
to beg for food or go off into the woods to gather firing, to be
sure of a warm bed and shoes and decent clothes. Mahailey was one
of eighteen children; most of them grew up lawless or
half-witted, and two of her brothers, like her husband, ended
their lives in jail. She had never been sent to school, and could
not read or write. Claude, when he was a little boy, tried to
teach her to read, but what she learned one night she had
forgotten by the next. She could count, and tell the time of day
by the clock, and she was very proud of knowing the alphabet and
of being able to spell out letters on the flour sacks and coffee
packages. "That's a big A." she would murmur, "and that there's a
little a."

Mahailey was shrewd in her estimate of people, and Claude thought
her judgment sound in a good many things. He knew she sensed all
the shades of personal feeling, the accords and antipathies in
the household, as keenly as he did, and he would have hated to
lose her good opinion. She consulted him in all her little
difficulties. If the leg of the kitchen table got wobbly, she
knew he would put in new screws for her. When she broke a handle
off her rolling pin, he put on another, and he fitted a haft to
her favourite butcher-knife after every one else said it must be
thrown away. These objects, after they had been mended, acquired
a new value in her eyes, and she liked to work with them. When
Claude helped her lift or carry anything, he never avoided
touching her, this she felt deeply. She suspected that Ralph was a
little ashamed of her, and would prefer to have some brisk young
thing about the kitchen.

On days like this, when other people were not about, Mahailey
liked to talk to Claude about the things they did together when
he was little; the Sundays when they used to wander along the
creek, hunting for wild grapes and watching the red squirrels; or
trailed across the high pastures to a wild-plum thicket at the
north end of the Wheeler farm. Claude could remember warm spring
days when the plum bushes were all in blossom and Mahailey used
to lie down under them and sing to herself, as if the honey-heavy
sweetness made her drowsy; songs without words, for the most
part, though he recalled one mountain dirge which said over and
over, "And they laid Jesse James in his grave."



IV

The time was approaching for Claude to go back to the struggling
denominational college on the outskirts of the state capital,
where he had already spent two dreary and unprofitable winters.

"Mother," he said one morning when he had an opportunity to speak
to her alone, "I wish you would let me quit the Temple, and go to
the State University."

She looked up from the mass of dough she was kneading.

"But why, Claude ?"

"Well, I could learn more, for one thing. The professors at the
Temple aren't much good. Most of them are just preachers who
couldn't make a living at preaching."

The look of pain that always disarmed Claude came instantly into
his mother's face. "Son, don't say such things. I can't believe
but teachers are more interested in their students when they are
concerned for their spiritual development, as well as the mental.
Brother Weldon said many of the professors at the State
University are not Christian men; they even boast of it, in some
cases."

"Oh, I guess most of them are good men, all right; at any rate
they know their subjects. These little pin-headed preachers like
Weldon do a lot of harm, running about the country talking. He's
sent around to pull in students for his own school. If he didn't
get them he'd lose his job. I wish he'd never got me. Most of the
fellows who flunk out at the State come to us, just as he did."

"But how can there be any serious study where they give so much
time to athletics and frivolity ? They pay their football coach a
larger salary than their President. And those fraternity houses
are places where boys learn all sorts of evil. I've heard that
dreadful things go on in them sometimes. Besides, it would take
more money, and you couldn't live as cheaply as you do at the
Chapins'."

Claude made no reply. He stood before her frowning and pulling at
a calloused spot on the inside of his palm. Mrs. Wheeler looked
at him wistfully. "I'm sure you must be able to study better in a
quiet, serious atmosphere," she said.

He sighed and turned away. If his mother had been the least bit
unctuous, like Brother Weldon, he could have told her many
enlightening facts. But she was so trusting and childlike, so
faithful by nature and so ignorant of life as he knew it, that it
was hopeless to argue with her. He could shock her and make her
fear the world even more than she did, but he could never make
her understand.

His mother was old-fashioned. She thought dancing and
card-playing dangerous pastimes--only rough people did such
things when she was a girl in Vermont--and "worldliness" only
another word for wickedness. According to her conception of
education, one should learn, not think; and above all, one must
not enquire. The history of the human race, as it lay behind one,
was already explained; and so was its destiny, which lay before.
The mind should remain obediently within the theological concept
of history.

Nat Wheeler didn't care where his son went to school, but he,
too, took it for granted that the religious institution was
cheaper than the State University; and that because the students
there looked shabbier they were less likely to become too
knowing, and to be offensively intelligent at home. However, he
referred the matter to Bayliss one day when he was in town.

"Claude's got some notion he wants to go to the State University
this winter."

Bayliss at once assumed that wise,
better-be-prepared-for-the-worst expression which had made him
seem shrewd and seasoned from boyhood. "I don't see any point in
changing unless he's got good reasons."

"Well, he thinks that bunch of parsons at the Temple don't make
first-rate teachers."

"I expect they can teach Claude quite a bit yet. If he gets in
with that fast football crowd at the State, there'll be no
holding him." For some reason Bayliss detested football. "This
athletic business is a good deal over-done. If Claude wants
exercise, he might put in the fall wheat."

That night Mr. Wheeler brought the subject up at supper,
questioned Claude, and tried to get at the cause of his
discontent. His manner was jocular, as usual, and Claude hated
any public discussion of his personal affairs. He was afraid of
his father's humour when it got too near him.

Claude might have enjoyed the large and somewhat gross cartoons
with which Mr. Wheeler enlivened daily life, had they been of any
other authorship. But he unreasonably wanted his father to be the
most dignified, as he was certainly the handsomest and most
intelligent, man in the community. Moreover, Claude couldn't bear
ridicule very well. He squirmed before he was hit; saw it coming,
invited it. Mr. Wheeler had observed this trait in him when he
was a little chap, called it false pride, and often purposely
outraged his feelings to harden him, as he had hardened Claude's
mother, who was afraid of everything but schoolbooks and
prayer-meetings when he first married her. She was still more or
less bewildered, but she had long ago got over any fear of him
and any dread of living with him. She accepted everything about
her husband as part of his rugged masculinity, and of that she
was proud, in her quiet way.

Claude had never quite forgiven his father for some of his
practical jokes. One warm spring day, when he was a boisterous
little boy of five, playing in and out of the house, he heard his
mother entreating Mr. Wheeler to go down to the orchard and pick
the cherries from a tree that hung loaded. Claude remembered that
she persisted rather complainingly, saying that the cherries were
too high for her to reach, and that even if she had a ladder it
would hurt her back. Mr. Wheeler was always annoyed if his wife
referred to any physical weakness, especially if she complained
about her back. He got up and went out. After a while he
returned. "All right now, Evangeline," he called cheerily as he
passed through the kitchen. "Cherries won't give you any trouble.
You and Claude can run along and pick 'em as easy as can be."

Mrs. Wheeler trustfully put on her sunbonnet, gave Claude a
little pail and took a big one herself, and they went down the
pasture hill to the orchard, fenced in on the low land by the
creek. The ground had been ploughed that spring to make it hold
moisture, and Claude was running happily along in one of the
furrows, when he looked up and beheld a sight he could never
forget. The beautiful, round-topped cherry tree, full of green
leaves and red fruit,--his father had sawed it through! It lay on
the ground beside its bleeding stump. With one scream Claude
became a little demon. He threw away his tin pail, jumped about
howling and kicking the loose earth with his copper-toed shoes,
until his mother was much more concerned for him than for the
tree.

"Son, son," she cried, "it's your father's tree. He has a perfect
right to cut it down if he wants to. He's often said the trees
were too thick in here. Maybe it will be better for the others."

"'Tain't so! He's a damn fool, damn fool!" Claude bellowed, still
hopping and kicking, almost choking with rage and hate.

His mother dropped on her knees beside him. "Claude, stop! I'd
rather have the whole orchard cut down than hear you say such
things."

After she got him quieted they picked the cherries and went back
to the house. Claude had promised her that he would say nothing,
but his father must have noticed the little boy's angry eyes
fixed upon him all through dinner, and his expression of scorn.
Even then his flexible lips were only too well adapted to hold
the picture of that feeling. For days afterward Claude went down
to the orchard and watched the tree grow sicker, wilt and wither
away. God would surely punish a man who could do that, he
thought.

A violent temper and physical restlessness were the most
conspicuous things about Claude when he was a little boy. Ralph
was docile, and had a precocious sagacity for keeping out of
trouble. Quiet in manner, he was fertile in devising mischief,
and easily persuaded his older brother, who was always looking
for something to do, to execute his plans. It was usually Claude
who was caught red-handed. Sitting mild and contemplative on his
quilt on the floor, Ralph would whisper to Claude that it might
be amusing to climb up and take the clock from the shelf, or to
operate the sewing-machine. When they were older, and played out
of doors, he had only to insinuate that Claude was afraid, to
make him try a frosted axe with his tongue, or jump from the shed
roof.

The usual hardships of country boyhood were not enough for
Claude; he imposed physical tests and penances upon himself.
Whenever he burned his finger, he followed Mahailey's advice and
held his hand close to the stove to "draw out the fire." One year
he went to school all winter in his jacket, to make himself
tough. His mother would button him up in his overcoat and put his
dinner-pail in his hand and start him off. As soon as he got out
of sight of the house, he pulled off his coat, rolled it under
his arm, and scudded along the edge of the frozen fields,
arriving at the frame schoolhouse panting and shivering, but very
well pleased with himself.



V

Claude waited for his elders to change their mind about where he
should go to school; but no one seemed much concerned, not even
his mother.

Two years ago, the young man whom Mrs. Wheeler called "Brother
Weldon" had come out from Lincoln, preaching in little towns and
country churches, and recruiting students for the institution at
which he taught in the winter. He had convinced Mrs. Wheeler that
his college was the safest possible place for a boy who was
leaving home for the first time.

Claude's mother was not discriminating about preachers. She
believed them all chosen and sanctified, and was never happier
than when she had one in the house to cook for and wait upon. She
made young Mr. Weldon so comfortable that he remained under her
roof for several weeks, occupying the spare room, where he spent
the mornings in study and meditation. He appeared regularly at
mealtime to ask a blessing upon the food and to sit with devout,
downcast eyes while the chicken was being dismembered. His
top-shaped head hung a little to one side, the thin hair was
parted precisely over his high forehead and brushed in little
ripples. He was soft spoken and apologetic in manner and took up
as little room as possible. His meekness amused Mr. Wheeler, who
liked to ply him with food and never failed to ask him gravely
"what part of the chicken he would prefer," in order to hear him
murmur, "A little of the white meat, if you please," while he
drew his elbows close, as if he were adroitly sliding over a
dangerous place. In the afternoon Brother Weldon usually put on
a fresh lawn necktie and a hard, glistening straw hat which left a
red streak across his forehead, tucked his Bible under his arm,
and went out to make calls. If he went far, Ralph took him in the
automobile.

Claude disliked this young man from the moment he first met him,
and could scarcely answer him civilly. Mrs. Wheeler, always
absent-minded, and now absorbed in her cherishing care of the
visitor, did not notice Claude's scornful silences until
Mahailey, whom such things never escaped, whispered to her over
the stove one day: "Mr. Claude, he don't like the preacher. He
just ain't got no use fur him, but don't you let on."

As a result of Brother Weldon's sojourn at the farm, Claude was
sent to the Temple College. Claude had come to believe that the
things and people he most disliked were the ones that were to
shape his destiny.

When the second week of September came round, he threw a few
clothes and books into his trunk and said good-bye to his mother
and Mahailey. Ralph took him into Frankfort to catch the train
for Lincoln. After settling himself in the dirty day-coach,
Claude fell to meditating upon his prospects. There was a Pullman
car on the train, but to take a Pullman for a daylight journey
was one of the things a Wheeler did not do.

Claude knew that he was going back to the wrong school, that he
was wasting both time and money. He sneered at himself for his
lack of spirit. If he had to do with strangers, he told himself,
he could take up his case and fight for it. He could not assert
himself against his father or mother, but he could be bold enough
with the rest of the world. Yet, if this were true, why did he
continue to live with the tiresome Chapins ? The Chapin household
consisted of a brother and sister. Edward Chapin was a man of
twenty-six, with an old, wasted face,--and he was still going to
school, studying for the ministry. His sister Annabelle kept
house for him; that is to say, she did whatever housework was
done. The brother supported himself and his sister by getting odd
jobs from churches and religious societies; he "supplied" the
pulpit when a minister was ill, did secretarial work for the
college and the Young Men's Christian Association. Claude's
weekly payment for room and board, though a small sum, was very
necessary to their comfort.

Chapin had been going to the Temple College for four years, and
it would probably take him two years more to complete the course.
He conned his book on trolley-cars, or while he waited by the
track on windy corners, and studied far into the night. His
natural stupidity must have been something quite out of the
ordinary; after years of reverential study, he could not read the
Greek Testament without a lexicon and grammar at his elbow. He
gave a great deal of time to the practice of elocution and
oratory. At certain hours their frail domicile--it had been
thinly built for the academic poor and sat upon concrete blocks
in lieu of a foundation--re-echoed with his hoarse, overstrained
voice, declaiming his own orations or those of Wendell Phillips.

Annabelle Chapin was one of Claude's classmates. She was not as
dull as her brother; she could learn a conjugation and recognize
the forms when she met with them again. But she was a gushing,
silly girl, who found almost everything in their grubby life too
good to be true; and she was, unfortunately, sentimental about
Claude. Annabelle chanted her lessons over and over to herself
while she cooked and scrubbed. She was one of those people who
can make the finest things seem tame and flat merely by alluding
to them. Last winter she had recited the odes of Horace about the
house--it was exactly her notion of the student-like thing to
do--until Claude feared he would always associate that poet with
the heaviness of hurriedly prepared luncheons.

Mrs. Wheeler liked to feel that Claude was assisting this worthy
pair in their struggle for an education; but he had long ago
decided that since neither of the Chapins got anything out of
their efforts but a kind of messy inefficiency, the struggle
might better have been relinquished in the beginning. He took
care of his own room; kept it bare and habitable, free from
Annabelle's attentions and decorations. But the flimsy pretences
of light-housekeeping were very distasteful to him. He was born
with a love of order, just as he was born with red hair. It was a
personal attribute.

The boy felt bitterly about the way in which he had been brought
up, and about his hair and his freckles and his awkwardness. When
he went to the theatre in Lincoln, he took a seat in the gallery,
because he knew that he looked like a green country boy. His
clothes were never right. He bought collars that were too high
and neckties that were too bright, and hid them away in his
trunk. His one experiment with a tailor was unsuccessful. The
tailor saw at once that his stammering client didn't know what he
wanted, so he persuaded him that as the season was spring he
needed light checked trousers and a blue serge coat and vest.
When Claude wore his new clothes to St. Paul's church on Sunday
morning, the eyes of every one he met followed his smart legs
down the street. For the next week he observed the legs of old
men and young, and decided there wasn't another pair of checked
pants in Lincoln. He hung his new clothes up in his closet and
never put them on again, though Annabelle Chapin watched for them
wistfully. Nevertheless, Claude thought he could recognize a
well-dressed man when he saw one. He even thought he could
recognize a well-dressed woman. If an attractive woman got into
the street car when he was on his way to or from Temple Place, he
was distracted between the desire to look at her and the wish to
seem indifferent.

Claude is on his way back to Lincoln, with a fairly liberal
allowance which does not contribute much to his comfort or
pleasure. He has no friends or instructors whom he can regard
with admiration, though the need to admire is just now uppermost
in his nature. He is convinced that the people who might mean
something to him will always misjudge him and pass him by. He is
not so much afraid of loneliness as he is of accepting cheap
substitutes; of making excuses to himself for a teacher who
flatters him, of waking up some morning to find himself admiring
a girl merely because she is accessible. He has a dread of easy
compromises, and he is terribly afraid of being fooled.



VI

Three months later, on a grey December day, Claude was seated in
the passenger coach of an accommodation freight train, going home
for the holidays. He had a pile of books on the seat beside him
and was reading, when the train stopped with a jerk that sent the
volumes tumbling to the floor. He picked them up and looked at
his watch. It was noon. The freight would lie here for an hour or
more, until the east-bound passenger went by. Claude left the car
and walked slowly up the platform toward the station. A bundle of
little spruce trees had been flung off near the freight office,
and sent a smell of Christmas into the cold air. A few drays
stood about, the horses blanketed. The steam from the locomotive
made a spreading, deep-violet stain as it curled up against the
grey sky.

Claude went into a restaurant across the street and ordered an
oyster stew. The proprietress, a plump little German woman with a
frizzed bang, always remembered him from trip to trip. While he
was eating his oysters she told him that she had just finished
roasting a chicken with sweet potatoes, and if he liked he could
have the first brown cut off the breast before the train-men came
in for dinner. Asking her to bring it along, he waited, sitting
on a stool, his boots on the lead-pipe foot-rest, his elbows on
the shiny brown counter, staring at a pyramid of tough looking
bun-sandwiches under a glass globe.

"I been lookin' for you every day," said Mrs. Voigt when she
brought his plate. "I put plenty good gravy on dem sweet
pertaters, ja."

"Thank you. You must be popular with your boarders."

She giggled. "Ja, all de train men is friends mit me. Sometimes
dey bring me a liddle Schweizerkase from one of dem big saloons
in Omaha what de Cherman beobles batronize. I ain't got no boys
mein own self, so I got to fix up liddle tings for dem boys, eh ?"

She stood nursing her stumpy hands under her apron, watching
every mouthful he ate so eagerly that she might have been tasting
it herself. The train crew trooped in, shouting to her and asking
what there was for dinner, and she ran about like an excited
little hen, chuckling and cackling. Claude wondered whether
working-men were as nice as that to old women the world over. He
didn't believe so. He liked to think that such geniality was
common only in what he broadly called "the West." He bought a big
cigar, and strolled up and down the platform, enjoying the fresh
air until the passenger whistled in.

After his freight train got under steam he did not open his books
again, but sat looking out at the grey homesteads as they
unrolled before him, with their stripped, dry cornfields, and the
great ploughed stretches where the winter wheat was asleep. A
starry sprinkling of snow lay like hoar-frost along the crumbly
ridges between the furrows.

Claude believed he knew almost every farm between Frankfort and
Lincoln, he had made the journey so often, on fast trains and
slow. He went home for all the holidays, and had been again and
again called back on various pretexts; when his mother was sick,
when Ralph overturned the car and broke his shoulder, when his
father was kicked by a vicious stallion. It was not a Wheeler
custom to employ a nurse; if any one in the household was ill, it
was understood that some member of the family would act in that
capacity.

Claude was reflecting upon the fact that he had never gone home
before in such good spirits. Two fortunate things had happened to
him since he went over this road three months ago.

As soon as he reached Lincoln in September, he had matriculated
at the State University for special work in European History. The
year before he had heard the head of the department lecture for
some charity, and resolved that even if he were not allowed to
change his college, he would manage to study under that man. The
course Claude selected was one upon which a student could put as
much time as he chose. It was based upon the reading of
historical sources, and the Professor was notoriously greedy for
full notebooks. Claude's were of the fullest. He worked early and
late at the University Library, often got his supper in town and
went back to read until closing hour. For the first time he was
studying a subject which seemed to him vital, which had to do
with events and ideas, instead of with lexicons and grammars. How
often he had wished for Ernest during the lectures! He could see
Ernest drinking them up, agreeing or dissenting in his
independent way. The class was very large, and the Professor
spoke without notes,--he talked rapidly, as if he were addressing
his equals, with none of the coaxing persuasiveness to which
Temple students were accustomed. His lectures were condensed like
a legal brief, but there was a kind of dry fervour in his voice,
and when he occasionally interrupted his exposition with purely
personal comment, it seemed valuable and important.

Claude usually came out from these lectures with the feeling that
the world was full of stimulating things, and that one was
fortunate to be alive and to be able to find out about them. His
reading that autumn actually made the future look brighter to
him; seemed to promise him something. One of his chief
difficulties had always been that he could not make himself
believe in the importance of making money or spending it. If that
were all, then life was not worth the trouble.

The second good thing that had befallen him was that he had got
to know some people he liked. This came about accidentally, after
a football game between the Temple eleven and the State
University team--merely a practice game for the latter. Claude
was playing half-back with the Temple. Toward the close of the
first quarter, he followed his interference safely around the
right end, dodged a tackle which threatened to end the play, and
broke loose for a ninety yard run down the field for a touchdown.
He brought his eleven off with a good showing. The State men
congratulated him warmly, and their coach went so far as to hint
that if he ever wanted to make a change, there would be a place
for him on the University team.

Claude had a proud moment, but even while Coach Ballinger was
talking to him, the Temple students rushed howling from the
grandstand, and Annabelle Chapin, ridiculous in a sport suit of
her own construction, bedecked with the Temple colours and
blowing a child's horn, positively threw herself upon his neck.
He disengaged himself, not very gently, and stalked grimly away
to the dressing shed.... What was the use, if you were always
with the wrong crowd ?

Julius Erlich, who played quarter on the State team, took him
aside and said affably: "Come home to supper with me tonight,
Wheeler, and meet my mother. Come along with us and dress in the
Armory. You have your clothes in your suitcase, haven't you ?"

"They're hardly clothes to go visiting in," Claude replied
doubtfully.

"Oh, that doesn't matter! We're all boys at home. Mother wouldn't
mind if you came in your track things."

Claude consented before he had time to frighten himself by
imagining difficulties. The Erlich boy often sat next him in the
history class, and they had several times talked together.
Hitherto Claude had felt that he "couldn't make Erlich out," but
this afternoon, while they dressed after their shower, they
became good friends, all in a few minutes. Claude was perhaps
less tied-up in mind and body than usual. He was so astonished at
finding himself on easy, confidential terms with Erlich that he
scarcely gave a thought to his second-day shirt and his collar
with a broken edge,--wretched economies he had been trained to
observe.

They had not walked more than two blocks from the Armory when
Julius turned in at a rambling wooden house with an unfenced,
terraced lawn. He led Claude around to the wing, and through a
glass door into a big room that was all windows on three sides,
above the wainscoting. The room was full of boys and young men,
seated on long divans or perched on the arms of easy chairs, and
they were all talking at once. On one of the couches a young man
in a smoking jacket lay reading as composedly as if he were
alone.

"Five of these are my brothers," said his host, "and the rest are
friends."

The company recognized Claude and included him in their talk
about the game. When the visitors had gone, Julius introduced his
brothers. They were all nice boys, Claude thought, and had easy,
agreeable manners. The three older ones were in business, but
they too had been to the game that afternoon. Claude had never
before seen brothers who were so outspoken and frank with one
another. To him they were very cordial; the one who was lying
down came forward to shake hands, keeping the place in his book
with his finger.

On a table in the middle of the room were pipes and boxes of
tobacco, cigars in a glass jar, and a big Chinese bowl full of
cigarettes. This provisionment seemed the more remarkable to
Claude because at home he had to smoke in the cowshed. The number
of books astonished him almost as much; the wainscoting all
around the room was built up in open bookcases, stuffed with
volumes fat and thin, and they all looked interesting and
hard-used. One of the brothers had been to a party the night
before, and on coming home had put his dress-tie about the neck
of a little plaster bust of Byron that stood on the mantel. This
head, with the tie at a rakish angle, drew Claude's attention
more than anything else in the room, and for some reason
instantly made him wish he lived there.

Julius brought in his mother, and when they went to supper Claude
was seated beside her at one end of the long table. Mrs. Erlich
seemed to him very young to be the head of such a family. Her
hair was still brown, and she wore it drawn over her ears and
twisted in two little horns, like the ladies in old
daguerreotypes. Her face, too, suggested a daguerreotype; there
was something old-fashioned and picturesque about it. Her skin
had the soft whiteness of white flowers that have been drenched
by rain. She talked with quick gestures, and her decided little
nod was quaint and very personal. Her hazel-coloured eyes peered
expectantly over her nose-glasses, always watching to see things
turn out wonderfully well; always looking for some good German
fairy in the cupboard or the cake-box, or in the steaming vapor
of wash-day.

The boys were discussing an engagement that had just been
announced, and Mrs. Erlich began to tell Claude a long story
about how this brilliant young man had come to Lincoln and met
this beautiful young girl, who was already engaged to a cold and
academic youth, and how after many heart-burnings the beautiful
girl had broken with the wrong man and become betrothed to the
right one, and now they were so happy, and every one, she asked
Claude to believe, was equally happy! In the middle of her
narrative Julius reminded her smilingly that since Claude didn't
know these people, he would hardly be interested in their
romance, but she merely looked at him over her nose-glasses and
said, "And is that so, Herr Julius!" One could see that she was a
match for them.

The conversation went racing from one thing to another. The
brothers began to argue hotly about a new girl who was visiting
in town; whether she was pretty, how pretty she was, whether she
was naive. To Claude this was like talk in a play. He had never
heard a living person discussed and analysed thus before. He had
never heard a family talk so much, or with anything like so much
zest. Here there was none of the poisonous reticence he had
always associated with family gatherings, nor the awkwardness of
people sitting with their hands in their lap, facing each other,
each one guarding his secret or his suspicion, while he hunted
for a safe subject to talk about. Their fertility of phrase, too,
astonished him; how could people find so much to say about one
girl ? To be sure, a good deal of it sounded far-fetched to him,
but he sadly admitted that in such matters he was no judge. When
they went back to the living room Julius began to pick out airs
on his guitar, and the bearded brother sat down to read. Otto,
the youngest, seeing a group of students passing the house, ran
out on to the lawn and called them in,--two boys, and a girl
with red cheeks and a fur stole. Claude had made for a corner,
and was perfectly content to be an on-looker, but Mrs. Erlich
soon came and seated herself beside him. When the doors into the
parlour were opened, she noticed his eyes straying to an
engraving of Napoleon which hung over the piano, and made him go
and look at it. She told him it was a rare engraving, and she
showed him a portrait of her great-grandfather, who was an
officer in Napoleon's army. To explain how this came about was a
long story.

As she talked to Claude, Mrs. Erlich discovered that his eyes
were not really pale, but only looked so because of his light
lashes. They could say a great deal when they looked squarely
into hers, and she liked what they said. She soon found out that
he was discontented; how he hated the Temple school, and why his
mother wished him to go there.

When the three who had been called in from the sidewalk took
their leave, Claude rose also. They were evidently familiars of
the house, and their careless exit, with a gay "Good-night,
everybody!" gave him no practical suggestion as to what he ought
to say or how he was to get out. Julius made things more
difficult by telling him to sit down, as it wasn't time to go
yet. But Mrs. Erlich said it was time; he would have a long ride
out to Temple Place.

It was really very easy. She walked to the door with him and gave
him his hat, patting his arm in a final way. "You will come often
to see us. We are going to be friends." Her forehead, with its
neat curtains of brown hair, came something below Claude's chin,
and she peered up at him with that quaintly hopeful expression,
as if--as if even he might turn out wonderfully well! Certainly,
nobody had ever looked at him like that before.

"It's been lovely," he murmured to her, quite without
embarrassment, and in happy unconsciousness he turned the knob
and passed out through the glass door.

While the freight train was puffing slowly across the winter
country, leaving a black trail suspended in the still air, Claude
went over that experience minutely in his mind, as if he feared
to lose something of it on approaching home. He could remember
exactly how Mrs. Erlich and the boys had looked to him on that
first night, could repeat almost word for word the conversation
which had been so novel to him. Then he had supposed the Erlichs
were rich people, but he found out afterwards that they were
poor. The father was dead, and all the boys had to work, even
those who were still in school. They merely knew how to live, he
discovered, and spent their money on themselves, instead of on
machines to do the work and machines to entertain people.
Machines, Claude decided, could not make pleasure, whatever else
they could do. They could not make agreeable people, either. In
so far as he could see, the latter were made by judicious
indulgence in almost everything he had been taught to shun.

Since that first visit, he had gone to the Erlichs', not as often
as he wished, certainly, but as often as he dared. Some of the
University boys seemed to drop in there whenever they felt like
it, were almost members of the family; but they were better
looking than he, and better company. To be sure, long Baumgartner
was an intimate of the house, and he was a gawky boy with big red
hands and patched shoes; but he could at least speak German to
the mother, and he played the piano, and seemed to know a great
deal about music.

Claude didn't wish to be a bore. Sometimes in the evening, when
he left the Library to smoke a cigar, he walked slowly past the
Erlichs' house, looking at the lighted windows of the
sitting-room and wondering what was going on inside. Before he
went there to call, he racked his brain for things to talk about.
If there had been a football game, or a good play at the theatre,
that helped, of course.

Almost without realizing what he was doing, he tried to think
things out and to justify his opinions to himself, so that he
would have something to say when the Erlich boys questioned him.
He had grown up with the conviction that it was beneath his
dignity to explain himself, just as it was to dress carefully, or
to be caught taking pains about anything. Ernest was the only
person he knew who tried to state clearly just why he believed
this or that; and people at home thought him very conceited and
foreign. It wasn't American to explain yourself; you didn't have
to! On the farm you said you would or you wouldn't; that
Roosevelt was all right, or that he was crazy. You weren't
supposed to say more unless you were a stump speaker,--if you
tried to say more, it was because you liked to hear yourself
talk. Since you never said anything, you didn't form the habit of
thinking. If you got too much bored, you went to town and bought
something new.

But all the people he met at the Erlichs' talked. If they asked
him about a play or a book and he said it was "no good," they at
once demanded why. The Erlichs thought him a clam, but Claude
sometimes thought himself amazing. Could it really be he, who was
airing his opinions in this indelicate manner ? He caught himself
using words that had never crossed his lips before, that in his
mind were associated only with the printed page. When he suddenly
realized that he was using a word for the first time, and
probably mispronouncing it, he would become as much confused as
if he were trying to pass a lead dollar, would blush and stammer
and let some one finish his sentence for him.

Claude couldn't resist occasionally dropping in at the Erlichs'
in the afternoon; then the boys were away, and he could have Mrs.
Erlich to himself for half-an-hour. When she talked to him she
taught him so much about life. He loved to hear her sing
sentimental German songs as she worked; "Spinn, spinn, du Tochter
mein." He didn't know why, but he simply adored it! Every time he
went away from her he felt happy and full of kindness, and
thought about beech woods and walled towns, or about Carl Schurz
and the Romantic revolution.

He had been to see Mrs. Erlich just before starting home for the
holidays, and found her making German Christmas cakes. She took
him into the kitchen and explained the almost holy traditions
that governed this complicated cookery. Her excitement and
seriousness as she beat and stirred were very pretty, Claude
thought. She told off on her fingers the many ingredients, but he
believed there were things she did not name: the fragrance of old
friendships, the glow of early memories, belief in wonder-working
rhymes and songs. Surely these were fine things to put into
little cakes! After Claude left her, he did something a Wheeler
didn't do; he went down to O street and sent her a box of the
reddest roses he could find. In his pocket was the little note
she had written to thank him.



VII

It was beginning to grow dark when Claude reached the farm. While
Ralph stopped to put away the car, he walked on alone to the
house. He never came back without emotion,--try as he would to
pass lightly over these departures and returns which were all in
the day's work. When he came up the hill like this, toward the
tall house with its lighted windows, something always clutched at
his heart. He both loved and hated to come home. He was always
disappointed, and yet he always felt the rightness of returning
to his own place. Even when it broke his spirit and humbled his
pride, he felt it was right that he should be thus humbled. He
didn't question that the lowest state of mind was the truest, and
that the less a man thought of himself, the more likely he was to
be correct in his estimate.

Approaching the door, Claude stopped a moment and peered in at
the kitchen window. The table was set for supper, and Mahailey
was at the stove, stirring something in a big iron pot; cornmeal
mush, probably,--she often made it for herself now that her teeth
had begun to fail. She stood leaning over, embracing the pot with
one arm, and with the other she beat the stiff contents, nodding
her head in time to this rotary movement. Confused emotions
surged up in Claude. He went in quickly and gave her a bearish
hug.

Her face wrinkled up in the foolish grin he knew so well. "Lord,
how you scared me, Mr. Claude! A little more'n I'd 'a' had my
mush all over the floor. You lookin' fine, you nice boy, you!"

He knew Mahailey was gladder to see him come home than any one
except his mother. Hearing Mrs. Wheeler's wandering, uncertain
steps in the enclosed stairway, he opened the door and ran
halfway up to meet her, putting his arm about her with the almost
painful tenderness he always felt, but seldom was at liberty to
show. She reached up both hands and stroked his hair for a
moment, laughing as one does to a little boy, and telling him she
believed it was redder every time he came back.

"Have we got all the corn in, Mother ?"

"No, Claude, we haven't. You know we're always behindhand. It's
been fine, open weather for husking, too. But at least we've got
rid of that miserable Jerry; so there's something to be thankful
for. He had one of his fits of temper in town one day, when he
was hitching up to come home, and Leonard Dawson saw him beat one
of our horses with the neck-yoke. Leonard told your father, and
spoke his mind, and your father discharged Jerry. If you or Ralph
had told him, he most likely wouldn't have done anything about
it. But I guess all fathers are the same." She chuckled
confidingly, leaning on Claude's arm as they descended the
stairs.

"I guess so. Did he hurt the horse much ? Which one was it ?"

"The little black, Pompey. I believe he is rather a mean horse.
The men said one of the bones over the eye was broken, but he
would probably come round all right."

"Pompey isn't mean; he's nervous. All the horses hated Jerry, and
they had good reason to." Claude jerked his shoulders to shake
off disgusting recollections of this mongrel man which flashed
back into his mind. He had seen things happen in the barn that
he positively couldn't tell his father. Mr. Wheeler came into the
kitchen and stopped on his way upstairs long enough to say,
"Hello, Claude. You look pretty well."

"Yes, sir. I'm all right, thank you."

"Bayliss tells me you've been playing football a good deal."

"Not more than usual. We played half a dozen games; generally got
licked. The State has a fine team, though."

"I ex-pect," Mr. Wheeler drawled as he strode upstairs.

Supper went as usual. Dan kept grinning and blinking at Claude,
trying to discover whether he had already been informed of
Jerry's fate. Ralph told him the neighbourhood gossip: Gus
Yoeder, their German neighbour, was bringing suit against a
farmer who had shot his dog. Leonard Dawson was going to marry
Susie Grey. She was the girl on whose account Leonard had slapped
Bayliss, Claude remembered.

After supper Ralph and Mr. Wheeler went off in the car to a
Christmas entertainment at the country schoolhouse. Claude and
his mother sat down for a quiet talk by the hard-coal burner in
the living room upstairs. Claude liked this room, especially when
his father was not there. The old carpet, the faded chairs, the
secretary book-case, the spotty engraving with all the scenes
from Pilgrim's Progress that hung over the sofa,--these things
made him feel at home. Ralph was always proposing to re-furnish
the room in Mission oak, but so far Claude and his mother had
saved it.

Claude drew up his favourite chair and began to tell Mrs. Wheeler
about the Erlich boys and their mother. She listened, but he
could see that she was much more interested in hearing about the
Chapins, and whether Edward's throat had improved, and where he
had preached this fall. That was one of the disappointing things
about coming home; he could never interest his mother in new
things or people unless they in some way had to do with the
church. He knew, too, she was always hoping to hear that he at
last felt the need of coming closer to the church. She did not
harass him about these things, but she had told him once or twice
that nothing could happen in the world which would give her so
much pleasure as to see him reconciled to Christ. He realized, as
he talked to her about the Erlichs, that she was wondering
whether they weren't very "worldly" people, and was apprehensive
about their influence on him. The evening was rather a failure,
and he went to bed early.

Claude had gone through a painful time of doubt and fear when he
thought a great deal about religion. For several years, from
fourteen to eighteen, he believed that he would be lost if he did
not repent and undergo that mysterious change called conversion.
But there was something stubborn in him that would not let him
avail himself of the pardon offered. He felt condemned, but he
did not want to renounce a world he as yet knew nothing of. He
would like to go into life with all his vigour, with all his
faculties free. He didn't want to be like the young men who said
in prayer-meeting that they leaned on their Saviour. He hated
their way of meekly accepting permitted pleasures.

In those days Claude had a sharp physical fear of death. A
funeral, the sight of a neighbour lying rigid in his black
coffin, overwhelmed him with terror. He used to lie awake in the
dark, plotting against death, trying to devise some plan of
escaping it, angrily wishing he had never been born. Was there no
way out of the world but this ? When he thought of the millions of
lonely creatures rotting away under ground, life seemed nothing
but a trap that caught people for one horrible end. There had
never been a man so strong or so good that he had escaped. And
yet he sometimes felt sure that he, Claude Wheeler, would escape;
that he would actually invent some clever shift to save himself
from dissolution. When he found it, he would tell nobody; he
would be crafty and secret. Putrefaction, decay.... He could
not give his pleasant, warm body over to that filthiness! What
did it mean, that verse in the Bible, "He shall not suffer His
holy one to see corruption" ?

If anything could cure an intelligent boy of morbid religious
fears, it was a denominational school like that to which Claude
had been sent. Now he dismissed all Christian theology as
something too full of evasions and sophistries to be reasoned
about. The men who made it, he felt sure, were like the men who
taught it. The noblest could be damned, according to their
theory, while almost any mean-spirited parasite could be saved by
faith. "Faith," as he saw it exemplified in the faculty of the
Temple school, was a substitute for most of the manly qualities
he admired. Young men went into the ministry because they were
timid or lazy and wanted society to take care of them; because
they wanted to be pampered by kind, trusting women like his
mother.

Though he wanted little to do with theology and theologians,
Claude would have said that he was a Christian. He believed in
God, and in the spirit of the four Gospels, and in the Sermon on
the Mount. He used to halt and stumble at "Blessed are the meek,"
until one day he happened to think that this verse was meant
exactly for people like Mahailey; and surely she was blessed!



VIII

On the Sunday after Christmas Claude and Ernest were walking
along the banks of Lovely Creek. They had been as far as Mr.
Wheeler's timber claim and back. It was like an autumn afternoon,
so warm that they left their overcoats on the limb of a crooked
elm by the pasture fence. The fields and the bare tree-tops
seemed to be swimming in light. A few brown leaves still clung to
the bushy trees along the creek. In the upper pasture, more than
a mile from the house, the boys found a bittersweet vine that
wound about a little dogwood and covered it with scarlet berries.
It was like finding a Christmas tree growing wild out of doors.
They had just been talking about some of the books Claude had
brought home, and his history course. He was not able to tell
Ernest as much about the lectures as he had meant to, and he felt
that this was more Ernest's fault than his own; Ernest was such a
literal-minded fellow. When they came upon the bittersweet, they
forgot their discussion and scrambled down the bank to admire the
red clusters on the woody, smoke-coloured vine, and its pale gold
leaves, ready to fall at a touch. The vine and the little tree it
honoured, hidden away in the cleft of a ravine, had escaped the
stripping winds, and the eyes of schoolchildren who sometimes
took a short cut home through the pasture. At its roots, the
creek trickled thinly along, black between two jagged crusts of
melting ice.

When they left the spot and climbed back to the level, Claude
again felt an itching to prod Ernest out of his mild and
reasonable mood.

"What are you going to do after a while, Ernest ? Do you mean to
farm all your life ?"

"Naturally. If I were going to learn a trade, I'd be at it before
now. What makes you ask that ?"

"Oh, I don't know! I suppose people must think about the future
sometime. And you're so practical."

"The future, eh ?" Ernest shut one eye and smiled. "That's a big
word. After I get a place of my own and have a good start, I'm
going home to see my old folks some winter. Maybe I'll marry a
nice girl and bring her back."

"Is that all ?"

"That's enough, if it turns out right, isn't it ?"

"Perhaps. It wouldn't be for me. I don't believe I can ever
settle down to anything. Don't you feel that at this rate there
isn't much in it ?"

"In what ?"

"In living at all, going on as we do. What do we get out of it ?
Take a day like this: you waken up in the morning and you're glad
to be alive; it's a good enough day for anything, and you feel
sure something will happen. Well, whether it's a workday or a
holiday, it's all the same in the end. At night you go to
bed--nothing has happened."

"But what do you expect ? What can happen to you, except in your
own mind ? If I get through my work, and get an afternoon off to
see my friends like this, it's enough for me."

"Is it ? Well, if we've only got once to live, it seems like there
ought to be something--well, something splendid about life,
sometimes."

Ernest was sympathetic now. He drew nearer to Claude as they
walked along and looked at him sidewise with concern. "You
Americans are always looking for something outside yourselves to
warm you up, and it is no way to do. In old countries, where not
very much can happen to us, we know that,--and we learn to make
the most of little things."

"The martyrs must have found something outside themselves.
Otherwise they could have made themselves comfortable with little
things."

"Why, I should say they were the ones who had nothing but their
idea! It would be ridiculous to get burned at the stake for the
sensation. Sometimes I think the martyrs had a good deal of
vanity to help them along, too."

Claude thought Ernest had never been so tiresome. He squinted at
a bright object across the fields and said cuttingly, "The fact
is, Ernest, you think a man ought to be satisfied with his board
and clothes and Sundays off, don't you ?"

Ernest laughed rather mournfully. "It doesn't matter much what I
think about it; things are as they are. Nothing is going to reach
down from the sky and pick a man up, I guess."

Claude muttered something to himself, twisting his chin about
over his collar as if he had a bridle-bit in his mouth.

The sun had dropped low, and the two boys, as Mrs. Wheeler
watched them from the kitchen window, seemed to be walking beside
a prairie fire. She smiled as she saw their black figures moving
along on the crest of the hill against the golden sky; even at
that distance the one looked so adaptable, and the other so
unyielding. They were arguing, probably, and probably Claude was
on the wrong side.



IX

After the vacation Claude again settled down to his reading in
the University Library. He worked at a table next the alcove
where the books on painting and sculpture were kept. The art
students, all of whom were girls, read and whispered together in
this enclosure, and he could enjoy their company without having
to talk to them. They were lively and friendly; they often asked
him to lift heavy books and portfolios from the shelves, and
greeted him gaily when he met them in the street or on the
campus, and talked to him with the easy cordiality usual between
boys and girls in a co-educational school. One of these girls,
Miss Peachy Millmore, was different from the others,--different
from any girl Claude had ever known. She came from Georgia, and
was spending the winter with her aunt on B street.

Although she was short and plump, Miss Millmore moved with what
might be called a "carriage," and she had altogether more manner
and more reserve than the Western girls. Her hair was yellow and
curly,--the short ringlets about her ears were just the colour of
a new chicken. Her vivid blue eyes were a trifle too prominent,
and a generous blush of colour mantled her cheeks. It seemed to
pulsate there,-one had a desire to touch her cheeks to see if
they were hot. The Erlich brothers and their friends called her
"the Georgia peach." She was considered very pretty, and the
University boys had rushed her when she first came to town. Since
then her vogue had somewhat declined.

Miss Millmore often lingered about the campus to walk down town
with Claude. However he tried to adapt his long stride to her
tripping gait, she was sure to get out of breath. She was always
dropping her gloves or her sketchbook or her purse, and he liked
to pick them up for her, and to pull on her rubbers, which kept
slipping off at the heel. She was very kind to single him out and
be so gracious to him, he thought. She even coaxed him to pose in
his track clothes for the life class on Saturday morning, telling
him that he had "a magnificent physique," a compliment which
covered him with confusion. But he posed, of course.

Claude looked forward to seeing Peachy Millmore, missed her if
she were not in the alcove, found it quite natural that she
should explain her absences to him,--tell him how often she
washed her hair and how long it was when she uncoiled it.

One Friday in February Julius Erlich overtook Claude on the
campus and proposed that they should try the skating tomorrow.

"Yes, I'm going out," Claude replied. "I've promised to teach
Miss Millmore to skate. Won't you come along and help me ?"

Julius laughed indulgently. "Oh, no! Some other time. I don't
want to break in on that."

"Nonsense! You could teach her better than I."

"Oh, I haven't the courage!"

"What do you mean ?"

"You know what I mean."

"No, I don't. Why do you always laugh about that girl, anyhow ?"

Julius made a little grimace. "She wrote some awfully slushy
letters to Phil Bowen, and he read them aloud at the frat house
one night."

"Didn't you slap him ?" Claude demanded, turning red.

"Well, I would have thought I would," said Julius smiling, "but I
didn't. They were too silly to make a fuss about. I've been wary
of the Georgia peach ever since. If you touched that sort of
peach ever so lightly, it might remain in your hand."

"I don't think so," replied Claude haughtily. "She's only
kind-hearted."

"Perhaps you're right. But I'm terribly afraid of girls who are
too kindhearted," Julius confessed. He had wanted to drop Claude
a word of warning for some time.

Claude kept his engagement with Miss Millmore. He took her out to
the skating pond several times, indeed, though in the beginning
he told her he feared her ankles were too weak. Their last
excursion was made by moonlight, and after that evening Claude
avoided Miss Millmore when he could do so without being rude. She
was attractive to him no more. It was her way to subdue by
clinging contact. One could scarcely call it design; it was a
degree less subtle than that. She had already thus subdued a pale
cousin in Atlanta, and it was on this account that she had been
sent North. She had, Claude angrily admitted, no reserve,--though
when one first met her she seemed to have so much. Her eager
susceptibility presented not the slightest temptation to him. He
was a boy with strong impulses, and he detested the idea of
trifling with them. The talk of the disreputable men his father
kept about the place at home, instead of corrupting him, had
given him a sharp disgust for sensuality. He had an almost
Hippolytean pride in candour.



X

The Erlich family loved anniversaries, birthdays, occasions. That
spring Mrs. Erlich's first cousin, Wilhelmina Schroeder-Schatz,
who sang with the Chicago Opera Company, came to Lincoln as
soloist for the May Festival. As the date of her engagement
approached, her relatives began planning to entertain her. The
Matinee Musical was to give a formal reception for the singer, so
the Erlichs decided upon a dinner. Each member of the family
invited one guest, and they had great difficulty in deciding
which of their friends would be most appreciative of the honour.
There were to be more men than women, because Mrs. Erlich
remembered that cousin Wilhelmina had never been partial to the
society of her own sex.

One evening when her sons were revising their list, Mrs. Erlich
reminded them that she had not as yet named her guest. "For me,"
she said with decision, "you may put down Claude Wheeler."

This announcement was met with groans and laughter.

"You don't mean it, Mother," the oldest son protested. "Poor old
Claude wouldn't know what it was all about,--and one stick can
spoil a dinner party."

Mrs. Erlich shook her finger at him with conviction. "You will
see; your cousin Wilhelmina will be more interested in that boy
than in any of the others!"

Julius thought if she were not too strongly opposed she might
still yield her point. "For one thing, Mother, Claude hasn't any
dinner clothes," he murmured. She nodded to him. "That has been
attended to, Herr Julius. He is having some made. When I sounded
him, he told me he could easily afford it."

The boys said if things had gone as far as that, they supposed
they would have to make the best of it, and the eldest wrote down
"Claude Wheeler" with a flourish.

If the Erlich boys were apprehensive, their anxiety was nothing
to Claude's. He was to take Mrs. Erlich to Madame
Schroeder-Schatz's recital, and on the evening of the concert,
when he appeared at the door, the boys dragged him in to look him
over. Otto turned on all the lights, and Mrs. Erlich, in her new
black lace over white satin, fluttered into the parlour to see
what figure her escort cut.

Claude pulled off his overcoat as he was bid, and presented
himself in the sooty blackness of fresh broadcloth. Mrs. Erlich's
eyes swept his long black legs, his smooth shoulders, and lastly
his square red head, affectionately inclined toward her. She
laughed and clapped her hands.

"Now all the girls will turn round in their seats to look, and
wonder where I got him!"

Claude began to bestow her belongings in his overcoat pockets;
opera glasses in one, fan in another. She put a lorgnette into
her little bag, along with her powder-box, handkerchief and
smelling salts,--there was even a little silver box of peppermint
drops, in case she might begin to cough. She drew on her long
gloves, arranged a lace scarf over her hair, and at last was
ready to have the evening cloak which Claude held wound about
her. When she reached up and took his arm, bowing to her sons,
they laughed and liked Claude better. His steady, protecting air
was a frame for the gay little picture she made.

The dinner party came off the next evening. The guest of honour,
Madame Wilhelmina Schroeder-Schatz, was some years younger than
her cousin, Augusta Erlich. She was short, stalwart, with an
enormous chest, a fine head, and a commanding presence. Her great
contralto voice, which she used without much discretion, was a
really superb organ and gave people a pleasure as substantial as
food and drink. At dinner she sat on the right of the oldest son.
Claude, beside Mrs. Erlich at the other end of the table, watched
attentively the lady attired in green velvet and blazing
rhinestones.

After dinner, as Madame Schroeder-Schatz swept out of the dining
room, she dropped her cousin's arm and stopped before Claude, who
stood at attention behind his chair.

"If Cousin Augusta can spare you, we must have a little talk
together. We have been very far separated," she said.

She led Claude to one of the window seats in the living-room, at
once complained of a draft, and sent him to hunt for her green
scarf. He brought it and carefully put it about her shoulders;
but after a few moments, she threw it off with a slightly annoyed
air, as if she had never wanted it. Claude with solicitude
reminded her about the draft.

"Draft ?" she said lifting her chin, "there is no draft here."

She asked Claude where he lived, how much land his father owned,
what crops they raised, and about their poultry and dairy. When
she was a child she had lived on a farm in Bavaria, and she
seemed to know a good deal about farming and live-stock. She was
disapproving when Claude told her they rented half their land to
other farmers. "If I were a young man, I would begin to acquire
land, and I would not stop until I had a whole county," she
declared. She said that when she met new people, she liked to
find out the way they made their living; her own way was a hard
one.

Later in the evening Madame Schroeder-Schatz graciously consented
to sing for her cousins. When she sat down to the piano, she
beckoned Claude and asked him to turn for her. He shook his head,
smiling ruefully.

"I'm sorry I'm so stupid, but I don't know one note from
another."

She tapped his sleeve. "Well, never mind. I may want the piano
moved yet; you could do that for me, eh ?"

When Madame Schroeder-Schatz was in Mrs. Erlich's bedroom,
powdering her nose before she put on her wraps, she remarked,
"What a pity, Augusta, that you have not a daughter now, to marry
to Claude Melnotte. He would make you a perfect son-in-law."

"Ah, if I only had!" sighed Mrs. Erlich.

"Or," continued Madame Schroeder-Schatz, energetically pulling on
her large carriage shoes, "if you were but a few years younger,
it might not yet be too late. Oh, don't be a fool, Augusta! Such
things have happened, and will happen again. However, better a
widow than to be tied to a sick man--like a stone about my neck!
What a husband to go home to! and I a woman in full vigour. Jas
ist ein Kreuz ich trage!" She smote her bosom, on the left side.

Having put on first a velvet coat, then a fur mantle, Madame
Schroeder-Schatz moved like a galleon out into the living room and
kissed all her cousins, and Claude Wheeler, good-night.



XI

One warm afternoon in May Claude sat in his upstairs room at the
Chapins', copying his thesis, which was to take the place of an
examination in history. It was a criticism of the testimony of
Jeanne d'Arc in her nine private examinations and the trial in
ordinary. The Professor had assigned him the subject with a flash
of humour. Although this evidence had been pawed over by so many
hands since the fifteenth century, by the phlegmatic and the
fiery, by rhapsodists and cynics, he felt sure that Wheeler would
not dismiss the case lightly.

Indeed, Claude put a great deal of time and thought upon the
matter, and for the time being it seemed quite the most important
thing in his life. He worked from an English translation of the
Proces, but he kept the French text at his elbow, and some of her
replies haunted him in the language in which they were spoken. It
seemed to him that they were like the speech of her saints, of
whom Jeanne said, "the voice is beautiful, sweet and low, and it
speaks in the French tongue." Claude flattered himself that he
had kept all personal feeling out of the paper; that it was a
cold estimate of the girl's motives and character as indicated by
the consistency and inconsistency of her replies; and of the
change wrought in her by imprisonment and by "the fear of the
fire."

When he had copied the last page of his manuscript and sat
contemplating the pile of written sheets, he felt that after all
his conscientious study he really knew very little more about
the Maid of Orleans than when he first heard of her from his
mother, one day when he was a little boy. He had been shut up in
the house with a cold, he remembered, and he found a picture of
her in armour, in an old book, and took it down to the kitchen
where his mother was making apple pies. She glanced at the
picture, and while she went on rolling out the dough and fitting
it to the pans, she told him the story. He had forgotten what she
said,--it must have been very fragmentary,--but from that time on
he knew the essential facts about Joan of Arc, and she was a
living figure in his mind. She seemed to him then as clear as
now, and now as miraculous as then.

It was a curious thing, he reflected, that a character could
perpetuate itself thus; by a picture, a word, a phrase, it could
renew itself in every generation and be born over and over again
in the minds of children. At that time he had never seen a map of
France, and had a very poor opinion of any place farther away
than Chicago; yet he was perfectly prepared for the legend of
Joan of Arc, and often thought about her when he was bringing in
his cobs in the evening, or when he was sent to the windmill for
water and stood shaking in the cold while the chilled pump
brought it slowly up. He pictured her then very much as he did
now; about her figure there gathered a luminous cloud, like dust,
with soldiers in it... the banner with lilies... a great
church... cities with walls.

On this balmy spring afternoon, Claude felt softened and
reconciled to the world. Like Gibbon, he was sorry to have
finished his labour,--and he could not see anything else as
interesting ahead. He must soon be going home now. There would be
a few examinations to sit through at the Temple, a few more
evenings with the Erlichs, trips to the Library to carry back the
books he had been using,--and then he would suddenly find himself
with nothing to do but take the train for Frankfort.

He rose with a sigh and began to fasten his history papers
between covers. Glancing out of the window, he decided that he
would walk into town and carry his thesis, which was due today;
the weather was too fine to sit bumping in a street car. The
truth was, he wished to prolong his relations with his manuscript
as far as possible.

He struck off by the road,--it could scarcely be called a street,
since it ran across raw prairie land where the buffalo-peas were
in blossom. Claude walked slower than was his custom, his straw
hat pushed back on his head and the blaze of the sun full in his
face. His body felt light in the scented wind, and he listened
drowsily to the larks, singing on dried weeds and sunflower
stalks. At this season their song is almost painful to hear, it
is so sweet. He sometimes thought of this walk long afterward; it
was memorable to him, though he could not say why.

On reaching the University, he went directly to the Department of
European History, where he was to leave his thesis on a long
table, with a pile of others. He rather dreaded this, and was
glad when, just as he entered, the Professor came out from his
private office and took the bound manuscript into his own hands,
nodding cordially.

"Your thesis ? Oh yes, Jeanne d'Arc. The Proces. I had forgotten.
Interesting material, isn't it ?" He opened the cover and ran over
the pages. "I suppose you acquitted her on the evidence ?"

Claude blushed. "Yes, sir."

"Well, now you might read what Michelet has to say about her.
There's an old translation in the Library. Did you enjoy working
on it ?"

"I did, very much." Claude wished to heaven he could think of
something to say.

"You've got a good deal out of your course, altogether, haven't
you ? I'll be interested to see what you do next year. Your work
has been very satisfactory to me." The Professor went back into
his study, and Claude was pleased to see that he carried the
manuscript with him and did not leave it on the table with the
others.



XII

Between haying and harvest that summer Ralph and Mr. Wheeler
drove to Denver in the big car, leaving Claude and Dan to
cultivate the corn. When they returned Mr. Wheeler announced that
he had a secret. After several days of reticence, during which he
shut himself up in the sitting-room writing letters, and passed
mysterious words and winks with Ralph at table, he disclosed a
project which swept away all Claude's plans and purposes.

On the return trip from Denver Mr. Wheeler had made a detour down
into Yucca county, Colorado, to visit an old friend who was in
difficulties. Tom Wested was a Maine man, from Wheeler's own
neighbourhood. Several years ago he had lost his wife. Now his
health had broken down, and the Denver doctors said he must
retire from business and get into a low altitude. He wanted to go
back to Maine and live among his own people, but was too much
discouraged and frightened about his condition even to undertake
the sale of his ranch and live stock. Mr. Wheeler had been able
to help his friend, and at the same time did a good stroke of
business for himself. He owned a farm in Maine, his share of his
father's estate, which for years he had rented for little more
than the up-keep. By making over this property, and assuming
certain mortgages, he got Wested's fine, well-watered ranch in
exchange. He paid him a good price for his cattle, and promised
to take the sick man back to Maine and see him comfortably
settled there. All this Mr. Wheeler explained to his family when
he called them up to the living room one hot, breathless night
after supper. Mrs. Wheeler, who seldom concerned herself with her
husband's business affairs, asked absently why they bought more
land, when they already had so much they could not farm half of
it.

"Just like a woman, Evangeline, just like a woman!" Mr. Wheeler
replied indulgently. He was sitting in the full glare of the
acetylene lamp, his neckband open, his collar and tie on the
table beside him, fanning himself with a palm-leaf fan. "You
might as well ask me why I want to make more money, when I
haven't spent all I've got."

He intended, he said, to put Ralph on the Colorado ranch and
"give the boy some responsibility." Ralph would have the help of
Wested's foreman, an old hand in the cattle business, who had
agreed to stay on under the new management. Mr. Wheeler assured
his wife that he wasn't taking advantage of poor Wested; the
timber on the Maine place was really worth a good deal of money;
but because his father had always been so proud of his great pine
woods, he had never, he said, just felt like turning a sawmill
loose in them. Now he was trading a pleasant old farm that didn't
bring in anything for a grama-grass ranch which ought to turn
over a profit of ten or twelve thousand dollars in good cattle
years, and wouldn't lose much in bad ones. He expected to spend
about half his time out there with Ralph. "When I'm away," he
remarked genially, "you and Mahailey won't have so much to do.
You can devote yourselves to embroidery, so to speak."

"If Ralph is to live in Colorado, and you are to be away from
home half of the time, I don't see what is to become of this
place," murmured Mrs. Wheeler, still in the dark.

"Not necessary for you to see, Evangeline," her husband replied,
stretching his big frame until the rocking chair creaked under
him. "It will be Claude's business to look after that."

"Claude ?" Mrs. Wheeler brushed a lock of hair back from her damp
forehead in vague alarm.

"Of course." He looked with twinkling eyes at his son's straight,
silent figure in the corner. "You've had about enough theology, I
presume ? No ambition to be a preacher ? This winter I mean to turn
the farm over to you and give you a chance to straighten things
out. You've been dissatisfied with the way the place is run for
some time, haven't you ? Go ahead and put new blood into it. New
ideas, if you want to; I've no objection. They're expensive, but
let it go. You can fire Dan if you want, and get what help you
need."

Claude felt as if a trap had been sprung on him. He shaded his
eyes with his hand. "I don't think I'm competent to run the place
right," he said unsteadily.

"Well, you don't think I am either, Claude, so we're up against
it. It's always been my notion that the land was made for man,
just as it's old Dawson's that man was created to work the land.
I don't mind your siding with the Dawsons in this difference of
opinion, if you can get their results."

Mrs. Wheeler rose and slipped quickly from the room, feeling her
way down the dark staircase to the kitchen. It was dusky and
quiet there. Mahailey sat in a corner, hemming dish-towels by the
light of a smoky old brass lamp which was her own cherished
luminary. Mrs. Wheeler walked up and down the long room in soft,
silent agitation, both hands pressed tightly to her breast, where
there was a physical ache of sympathy for Claude.

She remembered kind Tom Wested. He had stayed over night with
them several times, and had come to them for consolation after
his wife died. It seemed to her that his decline in health and
loss of courage, Mr. Wheeler's fortuitous trip to Denver, the old
pine-wood farm in Maine; were all things that fitted together and
made a net to envelop her unfortunate son. She knew that he had
been waiting impatiently for the autumn, and that for the first
time he looked forward eagerly to going back to school. He was
homesick for his friends, the Erlichs, and his mind was all the
time upon the history course he meant to take.

Yet all this would weigh nothing in the family councils probably
he would not even speak of it--and he had not one substantial
objection to offer to his father's wishes. His disappointment
would be bitter. "Why, it will almost break his heart," she
murmured aloud. Mahailey was a little deaf and heard nothing. She
sat holding her work up to the light, driving her needle with a
big brass thimble, nodding with sleepiness between stitches.
Though Mrs. Wheeler was scarcely conscious of it, the old woman's
presence was a comfort to her, as she walked up and down with her
drifting, uncertain step.

She had left the sitting-room because she was afraid Claude might
get angry and say something hard to his father, and because she
couldn't bear to see him hectored. Claude had always found life
hard to live; he suffered so much over little things,-and she
suffered with him. For herself, she never felt disappointments.
Her husband's careless decisions did not disconcert her. If he
declared that he would not plant a garden at all this year, she
made no protest. It was Mahailey who grumbled. If he felt like
eating roast beef and went out and killed a steer, she did the
best she could to take care of the meat, and if some of it
spoiled she tried not to worry. When she was not lost in
religious meditation, she was likely to be thinking about some
one of the old books she read over and over. Her personal life
was so far removed from the scene of her daily activities that
rash and violent men could not break in upon it. But where Claude
was concerned, she lived on another plane, dropped into the lower
air, tainted with human breath and pulsating with poor, blind,
passionate human feelings.

It had always been so. And now, as she grew older, and her flesh
had almost ceased to be concerned with pain or pleasure, like the
wasted wax images in old churches, it still vibrated with his
feelings and became quick again for him. His chagrins shrivelled
her. When he was hurt and suffered silently, something ached in
her. On the other hand, when he was happy, a wave of physical
contentment went through her. If she wakened in the night and
happened to think that he had been happy lately, she would lie
softly and gratefully in her warm place.

"Rest, rest, perturbed spirit," she sometimes whispered to him in
her mind, when she wakened thus and thought of him. There was a
singular light in his eyes when he smiled at her on one of his
good days, as if to tell her that all was well in his inner
kingdom. She had seen that same look again and again, and she
could always remember it in the dark,--a quick blue flash, tender
and a little wild, as if he had seen a vision or glimpsed bright
uncertainties.



XIII

The next few weeks were busy ones on the farm. Before the wheat
harvest was over, Nat Wheeler packed his leather trunk, put on
his "store clothes," and set off to take Tom Welted back to
Maine. During his absence Ralph began to outfit for life in Yucca
county. Ralph liked being a great man with the Frankfort
merchants, and he had never before had such an opportunity as
this. He bought a new shot gun, saddles, bridles, boots, long and
short storm coats, a set of furniture for his own room, a
fireless cooker, another music machine, and had them shipped to
Colorado. His mother, who did not like phonograph music, and
detested phonograph monologues, begged him to take the machine at
home, but he assured her that she would be dull without it on
winter evenings. He wanted one of the latest make, put out under
the name of a great American inventor.

Some of the ranches near Wested's were owned by New York men who
brought their families out there in the summer. Ralph had heard
about the dances they gave, and he way counting on being one of
the guests. He asked Claude to give him his dress suit, since
Claude wouldn't be needing it any more.

"You can have it if you want it," said Claude indifferently "But
it won't fit you."

"I'll take it in to Fritz and have the pants cut off a little and
the shoulders taken in," his brother replied lightly.

Claude was impassive. "Go ahead. But if that old Dutch man takes
a whack at it, it will look like the devil."

"I think I'll let him try. Father won't say anything about what
I've ordered for the house, but he isn't much for glad rags, you
know." Without more ado he threw Claude's black clothes into the
back seat of the Ford and ran into town to enlist the services of
the German tailor.

Mr. Wheeler, when he returned, thought Ralph had been rather free
in expenditures, but Ralph told him it wouldn't do to take over
the new place too modestly. "The ranchers out there are all
high-fliers. If we go to squeezing nickels, they won't think we
mean business."

The country neighbours, who were always amused at the Wheelers'
doings, got almost as much pleasure out of Ralph's lavishness as
he did himself. One said Ralph had shipped a new piano out to
Yucca county, another heard he had ordered a billiard table.
August Yoeder, their prosperous German neighbour, asked grimly
whether he could, maybe, get a place as hired man with Ralph.
Leonard Dawson, who was to be married in October, hailed Claude
in town one day and shouted;

"My God, Claude, there's nothing left in the furniture store for
me and Susie! Ralph's bought everything but the coffins. He must
be going to live like a prince out there."

"I don't know anything about it," Claude answered coolly. "It's
not my enterprise."

"No, you've got to stay on the old place and make it pay the
debts, I understand." Leonard jumped into his car, so that Claude
wouldn't have a chance to reply.

Mrs. Wheeler, too, when she observed the magnitude of these
preparations, began to feel that the new arrangement was not fair
to Claude, since he was the older boy and much the steadier.
Claude had always worked hard when he was at home, and made a
good field hand, while Ralph had never done much but tinker with
machinery and run errands in his car. She couldn't understand why
he was selected to manage an undertaking in which so much money
was invested.

"Why, Claude," she said dreamily one day, "if your father were an
older man, I would almost think his judgment had begun to fail.
Won't we get dreadfully into debt at this rate ?"

"Don't say anything, Mother. It's Father's money. He shan't think
I want any of it."

"I wish I could talk to Bayliss. Has he said anything ?"

"Not to me, he hasn't."

Ralph and Mr. Wheeler took another flying trip to Colorado, and
when they came back Ralph began coaxing his mother to give him
bedding and table linen. He said he wasn't going to live like a
savage, even in the sand hills. Mahailey was outraged to see the
linen she had washed and ironed and taken care of for so many
years packed into boxes. She was out of temper most of the time
now, and went about muttering to herself.

The only possessions Mahailey brought with her when she came to
live with the Wheelers, were a feather bed and three patchwork
quilts, interlined with wool off the backs of Virginia sheep,
washed and carded by hand. The quilts had been made by her old
mother, and given to her for a marriage portion. The patchwork on
each was done in a different design; one was the popular
"log-cabin" pattern, another the "laurel-leaf," the third the
"blazing star." This quilt Mahailey thought too good for use, and
she had told Mrs. Wheeler that she was saving it "to give Mr.
Claude when he got married."

She slept on her feather bed in winter, and in summer she put it
away in the attic. The attic was reached by a ladder which,
because of her weak back, Mrs. Wheeler very seldom climbed. Up
there Mahailey had things her own way, and thither she often
retired to air the bedding stored away there, or to look at the
pictures in the piles of old magazines. Ralph facetiously called
the attic "Mahailey's library."

One day, while things were being packed for the western ranch,
Mrs. Wheeler, going to the foot of the ladder to call Mahailey,
narrowly escaped being knocked down by a large feather bed which
came plumping through the trap door. A moment later Mahailey
herself descended backwards, holding to the rungs with one hand,
and in the other arm carrying her quilts.

"Why, Mahailey," gasped Mrs. Wheeler. "It's not winter yet;
whatever are you getting your bed for ?"

"I'm just a-goin' to lay on my fedder bed," she broke out, "or
direc'ly I won't have none. I ain't a-goin' to have Mr. Ralph
carryin' off my quilts my mudder pieced fur me."

Mrs. Wheeler tried to reason with her, but the old woman took up
her bed in her arms and staggered down the hall with it,
muttering and tossing her head like a horse in fly-time.

That afternoon Ralph brought a barrel and a bundle of straw into
the kitchen and told Mahailey to carry up preserves and canned
fruit, and he would pack them. She went obediently to the cellar,
and Ralph took off his coat and began to line the barrel with
straw. He was some time in doing this, but still Mahailey had not
returned. He went to the head of the stairs and whistled.

"I'm a-comin', Mr. Ralph, I'm a-comin'! Don't hurry me, I don't
want to break nothin'."

Ralph waited a few minutes. "What are you doing down there,
Mahailey ?" he fumed. "I could have emptied the whole cellar by
this time. I suppose I'll have to do it myself."

"I'm a-comin'. You'd git yourself all dusty down here." She came
breathlessly up the stairs, carrying a hamper basket full of
jars, her hands and face streaked with black.

"Well, I should say it is dusty!" Ralph snorted. "You might clean
your fruit closet once in awhile, you know, Mahailey. You ought
to see how Mrs. Dawson keeps hers. Now, let's see." He sorted the
jars on the table. "Take back the grape jelly. If there's
anything I hate, it's grape jelly. I know you have lots of it,
but you can't work it off on me. And when you come up, don't
forget the pickled peaches. I told you particularly, the pickled
peaches!"

"We ain't got no pickled peaches." Mahailey stood by the cellar
door, holding a corner of her apron up to her chin, with a queer,
animal look of stubbornness in her face.

"No pickled peaches ? What nonsense, Mahailey! I saw you making
them here, only a few weeks ago."

"I know you did, Mr. Ralph, but they ain't none now. I didn't
have no luck with my peaches this year. I must 'a' let the air
git at 'em. They all worked on me, an' I had to throw 'em out."

Ralph was thoroughly annoyed. "I never heard of such a thing,
Mahailey! You get more careless every year. Think of wasting all
that fruit and sugar! Does mother know ?"

Mahailey's low brow clouded. "I reckon she does. I don't wase
your mudder's sugar. I never did wase nothin'," she muttered. Her
speech became queerer than ever when she was angry.

Ralph dashed down the cellar stairs, lit a lantern, and searched
the fruit closet. Sure enough, there were no pickled peaches.
When he came back and began packing his fruit, Mahailey stood
watching him with a furtive expression, very much like the look
that is in a chained coyote's eyes when a boy is showing him off
to visitors and saying he wouldn't run away if he could.

"Go on with your work," Ralph snapped. "Don't stand there
watching me!"

That evening Claude was sitting on the windmill platform, down by
the barn, after a hard day's work ploughing for winter wheat. He
was solacing himself with his pipe. No matter how much she loved
him, or how sorry she felt for him, his mother could never bring
herself to tell him he might smoke in the house. Lights were
shining from the upstairs rooms on the hill, and through the open
windows sounded the singing snarl of a phonograph. A figure came
stealing down the path. He knew by her low, padding step that it
was Mahailey, with her apron thrown over her head. She came up to
him and touched him on the shoulder in a way which meant that
what she had to say was confidential.

"Mr. Claude, Mr. Ralph's done packed up a barr'l of your mudder's
jelly an' pickles to take out there."

"That's all right, Mahailey. Mr. Wested was a widower, and I
guess there wasn't anything of that sort put up at his place."

She hesitated and bent lower. "He asked me fur them pickled
peaches I made fur you, but I didn't give him none. I hid 'em all
in my old cook-stove we done put down cellar when Mr. Ralph
bought the new one. I didn't give him your mudder's new
preserves, nudder. I give him the old last year's stuff we had
left over, and now you an' your mudder'll have plenty." Claude
laughed. "Oh, I don't care if Ralph takes all the fruit on the
place, Mahailey!"

She shrank back a little, saying confusedly, "No, I know you
don't, Mr. Claude. I know you don't."

"I surely ought not to take it out on her," Claude thought, when
he saw her disappointment. He rose and patted her on the back.
"That's all right, Mahailey. Thank you for saving the peaches,
anyhow."

She shook her finger at him. "Don't you let on!"

He promised, and watched her slipping back over the zigzag path
up the hill.



XIV

Ralph and his father moved to the new ranch the last of August,
and Mr. Wheeler wrote back that late in the fall he meant to ship
a carload of grass steers to the home farm to be fattened during
the winter. This, Claude saw, would mean a need for fodder. There
was a fifty-acre corn field west of the creek,--just on the
sky-line when one looked out from the west windows of the house.
Claude decided to put this field into winter wheat, and early in
September he began to cut and bind the corn that stood upon it
for fodder. As soon as the corn was gathered, he would plough up
the ground, and drill in the wheat when he planted the other
wheat fields.

This was Claude's first innovation, and it did not meet with
approval. When Bayliss came out to spend Sunday with his mother,
he asked her what Claude thought he was doing, anyhow. If he
wanted to change the crop on that field, why didn't he plant oats
in the spring, and then get into wheat next fall ? Cutting fodder
and preparing the ground now, would only hold him back in his
work. When Mr. Wheeler came home for a short visit, he jocosely
referred to that quarter as "Claude's wheat field."

Claude went ahead with what he had undertaken to do, but all
through September he was nervous and apprehensive about the
weather. Heavy rains, if they came, would make him late with his
wheat-planting, and then there would certainly be criticism. In
reality, nobody cared much whether the planting was late or not,
but Claude thought they did, and sometimes in the morning he
awoke in a state of panic because he wasn't getting ahead faster.
He had Dan and one of August Yoeder's four sons to help him, and
he worked early and late. The new field he ploughed and drilled
himself. He put a great deal of young energy into it, and buried
a great deal of discontent in its dark furrows. Day after day he
flung himself upon the land and planted it with what was
fermenting in him, glad to be so tired at night that he could not
think.

Ralph came home for Leonard Dawson's wedding, on the first of
October. All the Wheelers went to the wedding, even Mahailey, and
there was a great gathering of the country folk and townsmen.

After Ralph left, Claude had the place to himself again, and the
work went on as usual. The stock did well, and there were no
vexatious interruptions. The fine weather held, and every morning
when Claude got up, another gold day stretched before him like a
glittering carpet, leading... ? When the question where the
days were leading struck him on the edge of his bed, he hurried
to dress and get down-stairs in time to fetch wood and coal for
Mahailey. They often reached the kitchen at the same moment, and
she would shake her finger at him and say, "You come down to help
me, you nice boy, you!" At least he was of some use to Mahailey.
His father could hire one of the Yoeder boys to look after the
place, but Mahailey wouldn't let any one else save her old back.

Mrs. Wheeler, as well as Mahailey, enjoyed that fall. She slept
late in the morning, and read and rested in the afternoon. She
made herself some new house-dresses out of a grey material Claude
chose. "It's almost like being a bride, keeping house for just
you, Claude," she sometimes said.

Soon Claude had the satisfaction of seeing a blush of green come
up over his brown wheat fields, visible first in the dimples and
little hollows, then flickering over the knobs and levels like a
fugitive smile. He watched the green blades coming every day,
when he and Dan went afield with their wagons to gather corn.
Claude sent Dan to shuck on the north quarter, and he worked on
the south. He always brought in one more load a day than Dan
did,--that was to be expected. Dan explained this very
reasonably, Claude thought, one afternoon when they were hooking
up their teams.

"It's all right for you to jump at that corn like you was
a-beating carpets, Claude; it's your corn, or anyways it's your
Paw's. Them fields will always lay betwixt you and trouble. But a
hired man's got no property but his back, and he has to save it.
I figure that I've only got about so many jumps left in me, and I
ain't a-going to jump too hard at no man's corn."

"What's the matter ? I haven't been hinting that you ought to jump
any harder, have I ?"

"No, you ain't, but I just want you to know that there's reason
in all things." With this Dan got into his wagon and drove off.
He had probably been meditating upon this declaration for some
time.

That afternoon Claude suddenly stopped flinging white ears into
the wagon beside him. It was about five o'clock, the yellowest
hour of the autumn day. He stood lost in a forest of light, dry,
rustling corn leaves, quite hidden away from the world. Taking
off his husking-gloves, he wiped the sweat from his face, climbed
up to the wagon box, and lay down on the ivory-coloured corn. The
horses cautiously advanced a step or two, and munched with great
content at ears they tore from the stalks with their teeth.

Claude lay still, his arms under his head, looking up at the
hard, polished blue sky, watching the flocks of crows go over
from the fields where they fed on shattered grain, to their nests
in the trees along Lovely Creek. He was thinking about what Dan
had said while they were hitching up. There was a great deal of
truth in it, certainly. Yet, as for him, he often felt that he
would rather go out into the world and earn his bread among
strangers than sweat under this half-responsibility for acres and
crops that were not his own. He knew that his father was
sometimes called a "land hog" by the country people, and he
himself had begun to feel that it was not right they should have
so much land,--to farm, or to rent, or to leave idle, as they
chose. It was strange that in all the centuries the world had
been going, the question of property had not been better
adjusted. The people who had it were slaves to it, and the people
who didn't have it were slaves to them.

He sprang down into the gold light to finish his load. Warm
silence nestled over the cornfield. Sometimes a light breeze rose
for a moment and rattled the stiff, dry leaves, and he himself
made a great rustling and crackling as he tore the husks from the
ears.

Greedy crows were still cawing about before they flapped
homeward. When he drove out to the highway, the sun was going
down, and from his seat on the load he could see far and near.
Yonder was Dan's wagon, coming in from the north quarter; over
there was the roof of Leonard Dawson's new house, and his
windmill, standing up black in the declining day. Before him were
the bluffs of the pasture, and the little trees, almost bare,
huddled in violet shadow along the creek, and the Wheeler
farm-house on the hill, its windows all aflame with the last red
fire of the sun.


XV

Claude dreaded the inactivity of the winter, to which the farmer
usually looks forward with pleasure. He made the Thanksgiving
football game a pretext for going up to Lincoln,--went intending
to stay three days and stayed ten. The first night, when he
knocked at the glass door of the Erlichs' sitting-room and took
them by surprise, he thought he could never go back to the farm.
Approaching the house on that clear, frosty autumn evening,
crossing the lawn strewn with crackling dry leaves, he told
himself that he must not hope to find things the same. But they
were the same. The boys were lounging and smoking about the
square table with the lamp on it, and Mrs. Erlich was at the
piano, playing one of Mendelssohn's "Songs Without Words." When
he knocked, Otto opened the door and called:

"A surprise for you, Mother! Guess who's here."

What a welcome she gave him, and how much she had to tell him!
While they were all talking at once, Henry, the oldest son, came
downstairs dressed for a Colonial ball, with satin breeches and
stockings and a sword. His brothers began to point out the
inaccuracies of his costume, telling him that he couldn't
possibly call himself a French emigré unless he wore a powdered
wig. Henry took a book of memoirs from the shelf to prove to them
that at the time when the French emigrés were coming to
Philadelphia, powder was going out of fashion.

During this discussion, Mrs. Erlich drew Claude aside and told
him in excited whispers that her cousin Wilhelmina, the singer,
had at last been relieved of the invalid husband whom she had
supported for so many years, and now was going to marry her
accompanist, a man much younger than herself.

After the French emigré had gone off to his party, two young
instructors from the University dropped in, and Mrs. Erlich
introduced Claude as her "landed proprietor" who managed a big
ranch out in one of the western counties. The instructors took
their leave early, but Claude stayed on. What was it that made
life seem so much more interesting and attractive here than
elsewhere ? There was nothing wonderful about this room; a lot of
books, a lamp... comfortable, hard-used furniture, some people
whose lives were in no way remarkable--and yet he had the sense
of being in a warm and gracious atmosphere, charged with generous
enthusiasms and ennobled by romantic friendships. He was glad to
see the same pictures on the wall; to find the Swiss wood-cutter
on the mantel, still bending under his load of faggots; to handle
again the heavy brass paper-knife that in its time had cut so
many interesting pages. He picked it up from the cover of a red
book lying there,-one of Trevelyan's volumes on Garibaldi, which
Julius told him he must read before he was another week older.

The next afternoon Claude took Mrs. Erlich to the football game
and came home with the family for dinner. He lingered on day
after day, but after the first few evenings his heart was growing
a little heavier all the time. The Erlich boys had so many new
interests he couldn't keep up with them; they had been going on,
and he had been standing still. He wasn't conceited enough to
mind that. The thing that hurt was the feeling of being out of
it, of being lost in another kind of life in which ideas played
but little part. He was a stranger who walked in and sat down
here; but he belonged out in the big, lonely country, where
people worked hard with their backs and got tired like the
horses, and were too sleepy at night to think of anything to say.
If Mrs. Erlich and her Hungarian woman made lentil soup and
potato dumplings and Wiener-Schnitzel for him, it only made the
plain fare on the farm seem the heavier.

When the second Friday came round, he went to bid his friends
good-bye and explained that he must be going home tomorrow. On
leaving the house that night, he looked back at the ruddy windows
and told himself that it was goodbye indeed, and not, as Mrs.
Erlich had fondly said, auf wiedersehen. Coming here only made
him more discontented with his lot; his frail claim on this kind
of life existed no longer. He must settle down into something
that was his own, take hold of it with both hands, no matter how
grim it was. The next day, during his journey out through the
bleak winter country, he felt that he was going deeper and deeper
into reality.

Claude had not written when he would be home, but on Saturday
there were always some of the neighbours in town. He rode out
with one of the Yoeder boys, and from their place walked on the
rest of the way. He told his mother he was glad to be back again.
He sometimes felt as if it were disloyal to her for him to be so
happy with Mrs. Erlich. His mother had been shut away from the
world on a farm for so many years; and even before that, Vermont
was no very stimulating place to grow up in, he guessed. She had
not had a chance, any more than he had, at those things which
make the mind more supple and keep the feeling young.

The next morning it was snowing outside, and they had a long,
pleasant Sunday breakfast. Mrs. Wheeler said they wouldn't try to
go to church, as Claude must be tired. He worked about the place
until noon, making the stock comfortable and looking after things
that Dan had neglected in his absence. After dinner he sat down
at the secretary and wrote a long letter to his friends in
Lincoln. Whenever he lifted his eyes for a moment, he saw the
pasture bluffs and the softly falling snow. There was something
beautiful about the submissive way in which the country met
winter. It made one contented,--sad, too. He sealed his letter
and lay down on the couch to read the paper, but was soon asleep.

When he awoke the afternoon was already far gone. The clock on
the shelf ticked loudly in the still room, the coal stove sent
out a warm glow. The blooming plants in the south bow-window
looked brighter and fresher than usual in the soft white light
that came up from the snow. Mrs. Wheeler was reading by the west
window, looking away from her book now and then to gaze off at
the grey sky and the muffled fields. The creek made a winding
violet chasm down through the pasture, and the trees followed it
in a black thicket, curiously tufted with snow. Claude lay for
some time without speaking, watching his mother's profile against
the glass, and thinking how good this soft, clinging snow-fall
would be for his wheat fields.

"What are you reading, Mother ?" he asked presently.

She turned her head toward him. "Nothing very new. I was just
beginning 'Paradise Lost' again. I haven't read it for a long
while."

"Read aloud, won't you ? Just wherever you happen to be. I like
the sound of it."

Mrs. Wheeler always read deliberately, giving each syllable its
full value. Her voice, naturally soft and rather wistful, trailed
over the long measures and the threatening Biblical names, all
familiar to her and full of meaning.

  "A dungeon horrible, on all sides round
  As one great furnace flamed; yet from the flames
  No light, but rather darkness visible
  Served only to discover sights of woe."

Her voice groped as if she were trying to realize something. The
room was growing greyer as she read on through the turgid
catalogue of the heathen gods, so packed with stories and
pictures, so unaccountably glorious. At last the light failed,
and Mrs. Wheeler closed the book.

"That's fine," Claude commented from the couch. "But Milton
couldn't have got along without the wicked, could he ?"

Mrs. Wheeler looked up. "Is that a joke ?" she asked slyly.

"Oh no, not at all! It just struck me that this part is so much
more interesting than the books about perfect innocence in Eden."

"And yet I suppose it shouldn't be so," Mrs. Wheeler said slowly,
as if in doubt.

Her son laughed and sat up, smoothing his rumpled hair. "The fact
remains that it is, dear Mother. And if you took all the great
sinners out of the Bible, you'd take out all the interesting
characters, wouldn't you ?"

"Except Christ," she murmured.

"Yes, except Christ. But I suppose the Jews were honest when they
thought him the most dangerous kind of criminal."

"Are you trying to tangle me up ?" his mother inquired, with both
reproach and amusement in her voice.

Claude went to the window where she was sitting, and looked out
at the snowy fields, now becoming blue and desolate as the
shadows deepened. "I only mean that even in the Bible the people
who were merely free from blame didn't amount to much."

"Ah, I see!" Mrs. Wheeler chuckled softly. "You are trying to get
me back to Faith and Works. There's where you always balked when
you were a little fellow. Well, Claude, I don't know as much
about it as I did then. As I get older, I leave a good deal more
to God. I believe He wants to save whatever is noble in this
world, and that He knows more ways of doing it than I." She rose
like a gentle shadow and rubbed her cheek against his flannel
shirt-sleeve, murmuring, "I believe He is sometimes where we
would least expect to find Him,--even in proud, rebellious
hearts."

For a moment they clung together in the pale, clear square of the
west window, as the two natures in one person sometimes meet and
cling in a fated hour.



XVI

Ralph and his father came home to spend the holidays, and on
Christmas day Bayliss drove out from town for dinner. He arrived
early, and after greeting his mother in the kitchen, went up to
the sitting-room, which shone with a holiday neatness, and, for
once, was warm enough for Bayliss,--having a low circulation, he
felt the cold acutely. He walked up and down, jingling the keys
in his pockets and admiring his mother's winter chrysanthemums,
which were still blooming. Several times he paused before the
old-fashioned secretary, looking through the glass doors at the
volumes within. The sight of some of those books awoke
disagreeable memories. When he was a boy of fourteen or fifteen,
it used to make him bitterly jealous to hear his mother coaxing
Claude to read aloud to her. Bayliss had never been bookish. Even
before he could read, when his mother told him stories, he at
once began to prove to her how they could not possibly be true.
Later he found arithmetic and geography more interesting than
"Robinson Crusoe." If he sat down with a book, he wanted to feel
that he was learning something. His mother and Claude were always
talking over his head about the people in books and stories.

Though Bayliss had a sentimental feeling about coming home, he
considered that he had had a lonely boyhood. At the country
school he had not been happy; he was the boy who always got the
answers to the test problems when the others didn't, and he kept
his arithmetic papers buttoned up in the inside pocket of his
little jacket until he modestly handed them to the teacher, never
giving a neighbour the benefit of his cleverness. Leonard Dawson
and other lusty lads of his own age made life as terrifying for
him as they could. In winter they used to throw him into a
snow-drift, and then run away and leave him. In summer they made
him eat live grasshoppers behind the schoolhouse, and put big
bull-snakes in his dinner pail to surprise him. To this day,
Bayliss liked to see one of those fellows get into difficulties
that his big fists couldn't get him out of.

It was because Bayliss was quick at figures and undersized for a
farmer that his father sent him to town to learn the implement
business. From the day he went to work, he managed to live on his
small salary. He kept in his vest pocket a little day-book
wherein he noted down all his expenditures,--like the
millionaire about whom the Baptist preachers were never tired of
talking,-and his offering to the contribution box stood out
conspicuous in his weekly account.

In Bayliss' voice, even when he used his insinuating drawl and
said disagreeable things, there was something a little plaintive;
the expression of a deep-seated sense of injury. He felt that he
had always been misunderstood and underestimated. Later after he
went into business for himself, the young men of Frankfort had
never urged him to take part in their pleasures. He had not been
asked to join the tennis club or the whist club. He envied Claude
his fine physique and his unreckoning, impulsive vitality, as if
they had been given to his brother by unfair means and should
rightly have been his.

Bayliss and his father were talking together before dinner when
Claude came in and was so inconsiderate as to put up a window,
though he knew his brother hated a draft. In a moment Bayliss
addressed him without looking at him:

"I see your friends, the Erlichs, have bought out the Jenkinson
company, in Lincoln; at least, they've given their notes."

Claude had promised his mother to keep his temper today, "Yes, I
saw it in the paper. I hope they'll succeed."

"I doubt it." Bayliss shook his head with his wisest look. "I
understand they've put a mortgage on their home. That old woman
will find herself without a roof one of these days."

"I don't think so. The boys have wanted to go into business
together for a long while. They are all intelligent and
industrious; why shouldn't they get on ?" Claude flattered himself
that he spoke in an easy, confidential way.

Bayliss screwed up his eyes. "I expect they're too fond of good
living. They'll pay their interest, and spend whatever's left
entertaining their friends. I didn't see the young fellow's name
in the notice of incorporation, Julius, do they call him ?"

"Julius is going abroad to study this fall. He intends to be a
professor."

"What's the matter with him ? Does he have poor health ?"

At this moment the dinner bell sounded, Ralph ran down from his
room where he had been dressing, and they all descended to the
kitchen to greet the turkey. The dinner progressed pleasantly.
Bayliss and his father talked politics, and Ralph told stories
about his neighbours in Yucca county. Bayliss was pleased that
his mother had remembered he liked oyster stuffing, and he
complimented her upon her mince pies. When he saw her pour a
second cup of coffee for herself and for Claude at the end of
dinner, he said, in a gentle, grieved tone, "I'm sorry to see you
taking two, Mother."

Mrs. Wheeler looked at him over the coffee-pot with a droll,
guilty smile. "I don't believe coffee hurts me a particle,
Bayliss."

"Of course it does; it's a stimulant." What worse could it be,
his tone implied! When you said anything was a "stimulant," you
had sufficiently condemned it; there was no more noxious word.

Claude was in the upper hall, putting on his coat to go down to
the barn and smoke a cigar, when Bayliss came out from the
sitting-room and detained him by an indefinite remark.

"I believe there's to be a musical show in Hastings Saturday
night."

Claude said he had heard something of the sort.

"I was thinking," Bayliss affected a careless tone, as if he
thought of such things every day, "that we might make a party and
take Gladys and Enid. The roads are pretty good."

"It's a hard drive home, so late at night," Claude objected.
Bayliss meant, of course, that Claude should drive the party up
and back in Mr. Wheeler's big car. Bayliss never used his
glistening Cadillac for long, rough drives.

"I guess Mother would put us up overnight, and we needn't take
the girls home till Sunday morning. I'll get the tickets."

"You'd better arrange it with the girls, then. I'll drive you, of
course, if you want to go."

Claude escaped and went out, wishing that Bayliss would do his
own courting and not drag him into it. Bayliss, who didn't know
one tune from another, certainly didn't want to go to this
concert, and it was doubtful whether Enid Royce would care much
about going. Gladys Farmer was the best musician in Frankfort,
and she would probably like to hear it.

Claude and Gladys were old friends, from their High School days,
though they hadn't seen much of each other while he was going to
college. Several times this fall Bayliss had asked Claude to go
somewhere with him on a Sunday, and then stopped to "pick Gladys
up," as he said. Claude didn't like it. He was disgusted, anyhow,
when he saw that Bayliss had made up his mind to marry Gladys.
She and her mother were so poor that he would probably succeed in
the end, though so far Gladys didn't seem to give him much
encouragement. Marrying Bayliss, he thought, would be no joke for
any woman, but Gladys was the one girl in town whom he
particularly ought not to marry. She was as extravagant as she
was poor. Though she taught in the Frankfort High School for
twelve hundred a year, she had prettier clothes than any of the
other girls, except Enid Royce, whose father was a rich man. Her
new hats and suede shoes were discussed and criticized year in
and year out. People said if she married Bayliss Wheeler, he
would soon bring her down to hard facts. Some hoped she would,
and some hoped she wouldn't. As for Claude, he had kept away from
Mrs. Farmer's cheerful parlour ever since Bayliss had begun to
drop in there. He was disappointed in Gladys. When he was
offended, he seldom stopped to reason about his state of feeling.
He avoided the person and the thought of the person, as if it
were a sore spot in his mind.



XVII

It had been Mr. Wheeler's intention to stay at home until spring,
but Ralph wrote that he was having trouble with his foreman, so
his father went out to the ranch in February. A few days after
his departure there was a storm which gave people something to
talk about for a year to come.

The snow began to fall about noon on St. Valentine's day, a soft,
thick, wet snow that came down in billows and stuck to
everything. Later in the afternoon the wind rose, and wherever
there was a shed, a tree, a hedge, or even a clump of tall weeds,
drifts began to pile up. Mrs. Wheeler, looking anxiously out from
the sitting-room windows, could see nothing but driving waves of
soft white, which cut the tall house off from the rest of the
world.

Claude and Dan, down in the corral, where they were provisioning
the cattle against bad weather, found the air so thick that they
could scarcely breathe; their ears and mouths and nostrils were
full of snow, their faces plastered with it. It melted constantly
upon their clothing, and yet they were white from their boots to
their caps as they worked,--there was no shaking it off. The air
was not cold, only a little below freezing. When they came in for
supper, the drifts had piled against the house until they covered
the lower sashes of the kitchen windows, and as they opened the
door, a frail wall of snow fell in behind them. Mahailey came
running with her broom and pail to sweep it up.

"Ain't it a turrible storm, Mr. Claude ? I reckon poor Mr. Ernest
won't git over tonight, will he ? You never mind, honey; I'll wipe
up that water. Run along and git dry clothes on you, an' take a
bath, or you'll ketch cold. Th' ole tank's full of hot water for
you." Exceptional weather of any kind always delighted Mahailey.

Mrs. Wheeler met Claude at the head of the stairs. "There's no
danger of the steers getting snowed under along the creek, is
there ?" she asked anxiously.

"No, I thought of that. We've driven them all into the little
corral on the level, and shut the gates. It's over my head down
in the creek bottom now. I haven't a dry stitch on me. I guess
I'll follow Mahailey's advice and get in the tub, if you can wait
supper for me."

"Put your clothes outside the bathroom door, and I'll see to
drying them for you."

"Yes, please. I'll need them tomorrow. I don't want to spoil my
new corduroys. And, Mother, see if you can make Dan change. He's
too wet and steamy to sit at the table with. Tell him if anybody
has to go out after supper, I'll go."

Mrs. Wheeler hurried down stairs. Dan, she knew, would rather sit
all evening in wet clothes than take the trouble to put on dry
ones. He tried to sneak past her to his own quarters behind the
wash-room, and looked aggrieved when he heard her message.

"I ain't got no other outside clothes, except my Sunday ones," he
objected.

"Well, Claude says he'll go out if anybody has to. I guess you'll
have to change for once, Dan, or go to bed without your supper."
She laughed quietly at his dejected expression as he slunk away.

"Mrs. Wheeler," Mahailey whispered, "can't I run down to the
cellar an' git some of them nice strawberry preserves ? Mr.
Claude, he loves 'em on his hot biscuit. He don't eat the honey
no more; he's got tired of it."

"Very well. I'll make the coffee good and strong; that will
please him more than anything."

Claude came down feeling clean and warm and hungry. As he opened
the stair door he sniffed the coffee and frying ham, and when
Mahailey bent over the oven the warm smell of browning biscuit
rushed out with the heat. These combined odours somewhat
dispersed Dan's gloom when he came back in squeaky Sunday shoes
and a bunglesome cut-away coat. The latter was not required of
him, but he wore it for revenge.

During supper Mrs. Wheeler told them once again how, long ago
when she was first married, there were no roads or fences west of
Frankfort. One winter night she sat on the roof of their first
dugout nearly all night, holding up a lantern tied to a pole to
guide Mr. Wheeler home through a snowstorm like this.

Mahailey, moving about the stove, watched over the group at the
table. She liked to see the men fill themselves with food-though
she did not count Dan a man, by any means, and she looked out to
see that Mrs. Wheeler did not forget to eat altogether, as she
was apt to do when she fell to remembering things that had
happened long ago. Mahailey was in a happy frame of mind because
her weather predictions had come true; only yesterday she had
told Mrs. Wheeler there would be snow, because she had seen
snowbirds. She regarded supper as more than usually important
when Claude put on his "velvet close," as she called his brown
corduroys.

After supper Claude lay on the couch in the sitting room, while
his mother read aloud to him from "Bleak House,"--one of the few
novels she loved. Poor Jo was drawing toward his end when Claude
suddenly sat up. "Mother, I believe I'm too sleepy. I'll have to
turn in. Do you suppose it's still snowing ?"

He rose and went to look out, but the west windows were so
plastered with snow that they were opaque. Even from the one on
the south he could see nothing for a moment; then Mahailey must
have carried her lamp to the kitchen window beneath, for all at
once a broad yellow beam shone out into the choked air, and down
it millions of snowflakes hurried like armies, an unceasing
progression, moving as close as they could without forming a
solid mass. Claude struck the frozen window-frame with his fist,
lifted the lower sash, and thrusting out his head tried to look
abroad into the engulfed night. There was a solemnity about a
storm of such magnitude; it gave one a feeling of infinity. The
myriads of white particles that crossed the rays of lamplight
seemed to have a quiet purpose, to be hurrying toward a definite
end. A faint purity, like a fragrance almost too fine for human
senses, exhaled from them as they clustered about his head and
shoulders. His mother, looking under his lifted arm, strained her
eyes to see out into that swarming movement, and murmured softly
in her quavering voice:

"Ever thicker, thicker, thicker, Froze the ice on lake and river;
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper, Fell the snow o'er all the
landscape."



XVIII

Claude's bedroom faced the east. The next morning, when he looked
out of his windows, only the tops of the cedars in the front yard
were visible. Hurriedly putting on his clothes he ran to the west
window at the end of the hall; Lovely Creek, and the deep ravine
in which it flowed, had disappeared as if they had never been.
The rough pasture was like a smooth field, except for humps and
mounds like haycocks, where the snow had drifted over a post or a
bush.

At the kitchen stairs Mahailey met him in gleeful excitement.
"Lord 'a' mercy, Mr. Claude, I can't git the storm door open.
We're snowed in fas'." She looked like a tramp woman, in a jacket
patched with many colours, her head tied up in an old black
"fascinator," with ravelled yarn hanging down over her face like
wild locks of hair. She kept this costume for calamitous
occasions; appeared in it when the water-pipes were frozen and
burst, or when spring storms flooded the coops and drowned her
young chickens.

The storm door opened outward. Claude put his shoulder to it and
pushed it a little way. Then, with Mahailey's fireshovel he
dislodged enough snow to enable him to force back the door. Dan
came tramping in his stocking-feet across the kitchen to his
boots, which were still drying behind the stove. "She's sure a
bad one, Claude," he remarked, blinking.

"Yes. I guess we won't try to go out till after breakfast. We'll
have to dig our way to the barn, and I never thought to bring the
shovels up last night."

"Th' ole snow shovels is in the cellar. I'll git 'em."

"Not now, Mahailey. Give us our breakfast before you do anything
else."

Mrs. Wheeler came down, pinning on her little shawl, her
shoulders more bent than usual. "Claude," she said fearfully,
"the cedars in the front yard are all but covered. Do you suppose
our cattle could be buried ?"

He laughed. "No, Mother. The cattle have been moving around all
night, I expect."

When the two men started out with the wooden snow shovels, Mrs.
Wheeler and Mahailey stood in the doorway, watching them. For a
short distance from the house the path they dug was like a
tunnel, and the white walls on either side were higher than their
heads. On the breast of the hill the snow was not so deep, and
they made better headway. They had to fight through a second
heavy drift before they reached the barn, where they went in and
warmed themselves among the horses and cows. Dan was for getting
next a warm cow and beginning to milk.

"Not yet," said Claude. "I want to have a look at the hogs before
we do anything here."

The hog-house was built down in a draw behind the barn. When
Claude reached the edge of the gully, blown almost bare, he could
look about him. The draw was full of snow, smooth... except in
the middle, where there was a rumpled depression, resembling a
great heap of tumbled bed-linen.

Dan gasped. "God a' mighty, Claude, the roof's fell in! Them
hogs'll be smothered."

"They will if we don't get at them pretty quick. Run to the house
and tell Mother. Mahailey will have to milk this morning, and get
back here as fast as you can."

The roof was a flat thatch, and the weight of the snow had been
too much for it. Claude wondered if he should have put on a new
thatch that fall; but the old one wasn't leaky, and had seemed
strong enough.

When Dan got back they took turns, one going ahead and throwing
out as much snow as he could, the other handling the snow that
fell back. After an hour or so of this work, Dan leaned on his
shovel.

"We'll never do it, Claude. Two men couldn't throw all that snow
out in a week. I'm about all in."

"Well, you can go back to the house and sit by the fire," Claude
called fiercely. He had taken off his coat and was working in his
shirt and sweater. The sweat was rolling from his face, his back
and arms ached, and his hands, which he couldn't keep dry, were
blistered. There were thirty-seven hogs in the hog-house.

Dan sat down in the hole. "Maybe if I could git a drink of water,
I could hold on a-ways," he said dejectedly.

It was past noon when they got into the shed; a cloud of steam
rose, and they heard grunts. They found the pigs all lying in a
heap at one end, and pulled the top ones off alive and squealing.
Twelve hogs, at the bottom of the pile, had been suffocated. They
lay there wet and black in the snow, their bodies warm and
smoking, but they were dead; there was no mistaking that.

Mrs. Wheeler, in her husband's rubber boots and an old overcoat,
came down with Mahailey to view the scene of disaster.

"You ought to git right at them hawgs an' butcher 'em today,"
Mahailey called down to the men. She was standing on the edge of
the draw, in her patched jacket and ravelled hood. Claude, down
in the hole, brushed the sleeve of his sweater across his
streaming face. "Butcher them ?" he cried indignantly. "I wouldn't
butcher them if I never saw meat again."

"You ain't a-goin' to let all that good hawg-meat go to wase, air
you, Mr. Claude ?" Mahailey pleaded. "They didn't have no sickness
nor nuthin'. Only you'll have to git right at 'em, or the meat
won't be healthy."

"It wouldn't be healthy for me, anyhow. I don't know what I will
do with them, but I'm mighty sure I won't butcher them."

"Don't bother him, Mahailey," Mrs. Wheeler cautioned her. "He's
tired, and he has to fix some place for the live hogs."

"I know he is, mam, but I could easy cut up one of them hawgs
myself. I butchered my own little pig onct, in Virginia. I could
save the hams, anyways, and the spare-ribs. We ain't had no
spare-ribs for ever so long."

What with the ache in his back and his chagrin at losing the
pigs, Claude was feeling desperate. "Mother," he shouted, "if you
don't take Mahailey into the house, I'll go crazy!"

That evening Mrs. Wheeler asked him how much the twelve hogs
would have been worth in money. He looked a little startled.

"Oh, I don't know exactly; three hundred dollars, anyway."

"Would it really be as much as that ? I don't see how we could
have prevented it, do you ?" Her face looked troubled.

Claude went to bed immediately after supper, but he had no sooner
stretched his aching body between the sheets than he began to
feel wakeful. He was humiliated at losing the pigs, because they
had been left in his charge; but for the loss in money, about
which even his mother was grieved, he didn't seem to care. He
wondered whether all that winter he hadn't been working himself
up into a childish contempt for money-values.

When Ralph was home at Christmas time, he wore on his little
finger a heavy gold ring, with a diamond as big as a pea,
surrounded by showy grooves in the metal. He admitted to Claude
that he had won it in a poker game. Ralph's hands were never free
from automobile grease--they were the red, stumpy kind that
couldn't be kept clean. Claude remembered him milking in the barn
by lantern light, his jewel throwing off jabbing sparkles of
colour, and his fingers looking very much like the teats of the
cow. That picture rose before him now, as a symbol of what
successful farming led to.

The farmer raised and took to market things with an intrinsic
value; wheat and corn as good as could be grown anywhere in the
world, hogs and cattle that were the best of their kind. In
return he got manufactured articles of poor quality; showy
furniture that went to pieces, carpets and draperies that faded,
clothes that made a handsome man look like a clown. Most of his
money was paid out for machinery,--and that, too, went to pieces.
A steam thrasher didn't last long; a horse outlived three
automobiles.

Claude felt sure that when he was a little boy and all the
neighbours were poor, they and their houses and farms had more
individuality. The farmers took time then to plant fine
cottonwood groves on their places, and to set osage orange hedges
along the borders of their fields. Now these trees were all being
cut down and grubbed up. Just why, nobody knew; they impoverished
the land... they made the snow drift... nobody had them any
more. With prosperity came a kind of callousness; everybody
wanted to destroy the old things they used to take pride in. The
orchards, which had been nursed and tended so carefully twenty
years ago, were now left to die of neglect. It was less trouble
to run into town in an automobile and buy fruit than it was to
raise it.

The people themselves had changed. He could remember when all the
farmers in this community were friendly toward each other; now
they were continually having lawsuits. Their sons were either
stingy and grasping, or extravagant and lazy, and they were
always stirring up trouble. Evidently, it took more intelligence
to spend money than to make it.

When he pondered upon this conclusion, Claude thought of the
Erlichs. Julius could go abroad and study for his doctor's
degree, and live on less than Ralph wasted every year. Ralph
would never have a profession or a trade, would never do or make
anything the world needed.

Nor did Claude find his own outlook much better. He was
twenty-one years old, and he had no skill, no training,--no
ability that would ever take him among the kind of people he
admired. He was a clumsy, awkward farmer boy, and even Mrs.
Erlich seemed to think the farm the best place for him. Probably
it was; but all the same he didn't find this kind of life worth
the trouble of getting up every morning. He could not see the use
of working for money, when money brought nothing one wanted. Mrs.
Erlich said it brought security. Sometimes he thought this
security was what was the matter with everybody; that only
perfect safety was required to kill all the best qualities in
people and develop the mean ones.

Ernest, too, said "it's the best life in the world, Claude."

But if you went to bed defeated every night, and dreaded to wake
in the morning, then clearly it was too good a life for you. To
be assured, at his age, of three meals a day and plenty of sleep,
was like being assured of a decent burial. Safety, security; if
you followed that reasoning out, then the unborn, those who would
never be born, were the safest of all; nothing could happen to
them.

Claude knew, and everybody else knew, seemingly, that there was
something wrong with him. He had been unable to conceal his
discontent. Mr. Wheeler was afraid he was one of those visionary
fellows who make unnecessary difficulties for themselves and
other people. Mrs. Wheeler thought the trouble with her son was
that he had not yet found his Saviour. Bayliss was convinced that
his brother was a moral rebel, that behind his reticence and his
guarded manner he concealed the most dangerous opinions. The
neighbours liked Claude, but they laughed at him, and said it was
a good thing his father was well fixed. Claude was aware that his
energy, instead of accomplishing something, was spent in
resisting unalterable conditions, and in unavailing efforts to
subdue his own nature. When he thought he had at last got himself
in hand, a moment would undo the work of days; in a flash he
would be transformed from a wooden post into a living boy. He
would spring to his feet, turn over quickly in bed, or stop short
in his walk, because the old belief flashed up in him with an
intense kind of hope, an intense kind of pain,--the conviction
that there was something splendid about life, if he could but
find it.

IX

The weather, after the big storm, behaved capriciously. There was
a partial thaw which threatened to flood everything,--then a hard
freeze. The whole country glittered with an icy crust, and people
went about on a platform of frozen snow, quite above the level of
ordinary life. Claude got out Mr. Wheeler's old double sleigh
from the mass of heterogeneous objects that had for years lain on
top of it, and brought the rusty sleighbells up to the house for
Mahailey to scour with brick dust. Now that they had automobiles,
most of the farmers had let their old sleighs go to pieces. But
the Wheelers always kept everything.

Claude told his mother he meant to take Enid Royce for a
sleigh-ride. Enid was the daughter of Jason Royce, the grain
merchant, one of the early settlers, who for many years had run
the only grist mill in Frankfort county. She and Claude were old
playmates; he made a formal call at the millhouse, as it was
called, every summer during his vacation, and often dropped in to
see Mr. Royce at his town office.

Immediately after supper, Claude put the two wiry little blacks,
Pompey and Satan, to the sleigh. The moon had been up since long
before the sun went down, had been hanging pale in the sky most
of the afternoon, and now it flooded the snow-terraced land with
silver. It was one of those sparkling winter nights when a boy
feels that though the world is very big, he himself is bigger;
that under the whole crystalline blue sky there is no one quite
so warm and sentient as himself, and that all this magnificence
is for him. The sleighbells rang out with a kind of musical
lightheartedness, as if they were glad to sing again, after the
many winters they had hung rusty and dustchoked in the barn.

The mill road, that led off the highway and down to the river,
had pleasant associations for Claude. When he was a youngster,
every time his father went to mill, he begged to go along. He
liked the mill and the miller and the miller's little girl. He
had never liked the miller's house, however, and he was afraid of
Enid's mother. Even now, as he tied his horses to the long
hitch-bar down by the engine room, he resolved that he would not
be persuaded to enter that formal parlour, full of new-looking,
expensive furniture, where his energy always deserted him and he
could never think of anything to talk about. If he moved, his
shoes squeaked in the silence, and Mrs. Royce sat and blinked her
sharp little eyes at him, and the longer he stayed, the harder it
was to go.

Enid herself came to the door.

"Why, it's Claude!" she exclaimed. "Won't you come in ?"

"No, I want you to go riding. I've got the old sleigh out. Come
on, it's a fine night!"

"I thought I heard bells. Won't you come in and see Mother while
I get my things on ?"

Claude said he must stay with his horses, and ran back to the
hitch-bar. Enid didn't keep him waiting long; she wasn't that
kind. She came swiftly down the path and through the front gate
in the Maine seal motor-coat she wore when she drove her coupe in
cold weather.

"Now, which way ?" Claude asked as the horses sprang forward and
the bells began to jingle.

"Almost any way. What a beautiful night! And I love your bells,
Claude. I haven't heard sleighbells since you used to bring me
and Gladys home from school in stormy weather. Why don't we stop
for her tonight ? She has furs now, you know!" Here Enid laughed.
"All the old ladies are so terribly puzzled about them; they
can't find out whether your brother really gave them to her for
Christmas or not. If they were sure she bought them for herself,
I believe they'd hold a public meeting."

Claude cracked his whip over his eager little blacks. "Doesn't it
make you tired, the way they are always nagging at Gladys ?"

"It would, if she minded. But she's just as serene! They must
have something to fuss about, and of course poor Mrs. Farmer's
back taxes are piling up. I certainly suspect Bayliss of the
furs."

Claude did not feel as eager to stop for Gladys as he had been a
few moments before. They were approaching the town now, and
lighted windows shone softly across the blue whiteness of the
snow. Even in progressive Frankfort, the street lights were
turned off on a night so glorious as this. Mrs. Farmer and her
daughter had a little white cottage down in the south part of the
town, where only people of modest means lived. "We must stop to
see Gladys' mother, if only for a minute," Enid said as they drew
up before the fence. "She is so fond of company." Claude tied his
team to a tree, and they went up to the narrow, sloping porch,
hung with vines that were full of frozen snow.

Mrs. Farmer met them; a large, rosy woman of fifty, with a
pleasant Kentucky voice. She took Enid's arm affectionately, and
Claude followed them into the long, low sitting-room, which had
an uneven floor and a lamp at either end, and was scantily
furnished in rickety mahogany. There, close beside the hard-coal
burner, sat Bayliss Wheeler. He did not rise when they entered,
but said, "Hello, folks," in a rather sheepish voice. On a little
table, beside Mrs. Farmer's workbasket, was the box of candy he
had lately taken out of his overcoat pocket, still tied up with
its gold cord. A tall lamp stood beside the piano, where Gladys
had evidently been practising. Claude wondered whether Bayliss
actually pretended to an interest in music! At this moment Gladys
was in the kitchen, Mrs. Farmer explained, looking for her
mother's glasses, mislaid when she was copying a recipe for a
cheese soufflé.

"Are you still getting new recipes, Mrs. Farmer ?" Enid asked her.
"I thought you could make every dish in the world already."

"Oh, not quite!" Mrs. Farmer laughed modestly and showed that she
liked compliments. "Do sit down, Claude," she besought of the
stiff image by the door. "Daughter will be here directly."

At that moment Gladys Farmer appeared.

"Why, I didn't know you had company, Mother," she said, coming in
to greet them.

This meant, Claude supposed, that Bayliss was not company. He
scarcely glanced at Gladys as he took the hand she held out to
him.

One of Gladys' grandfathers had come from Antwerp, and she had
the settled composure, the full red lips, brown eyes, and dimpled
white hands which occur so often in Flemish portraits of young
women. Some people thought her a trifle heavy, too mature and
positive to be called pretty, even though they admired her rich,
tulip-like complexion. Gladys never seemed aware that her looks
and her poverty and her extravagance were the subject of
perpetual argument, but went to and from school every day with
the air of one whose position is assured. Her musicianship gave
her a kind of authority in Frankfort.

Enid explained the purpose of their call. "Claude has got out his
old sleigh, and we've come to take you for a ride. Perhaps
Bayliss will go, too ?"

Bayliss said he guessed he would, though Claude knew there was
nothing he hated so much as being out in the cold. Gladys ran
upstairs to put on a warm dress, and Enid accompanied her,
leaving Mrs. Farmer to make agreeable conversation between her
two incompatible guests.

"Bayliss was just telling us how you lost your hogs in the storm,
Claude. What a pity!" she said sympathetically.

Yes, Claude thought, Bayliss wouldn't be at all reticent about
that incident!

"I suppose there was really no way to save them," Mrs. Farmer
went on in her polite way; her voice was low and round, like her
daughter's, different from the high, tight Western voice. "So I
hope you don't let yourself worry about it."

"No, I don't worry about anything as dead as those hogs were.
What's the use ?" Claude asked boldly.

"That's right," murmured Mrs. Farmer, rocking a little in her
chair. "Such things will happen sometimes, and we ought not to
take them too hard. It isn't as if a person had been hurt, is
it ?"

Claude shook himself and tried to respond to her cordiality, and
to the shabby comfort of her long parlour, so evidently doing its
best to be attractive to her friends. There weren't four steady
legs on any of the stuffed chairs or little folding tables she
had brought up from the South, and the heavy gold moulding was
half broken away from the oil portrait of her father, the judge.
But she carried her poverty lightly, as Southern people did after
the Civil War, and she didn't fret half so much about her back
taxes as her neighbours did. Claude tried to talk agreeably to
her, but he was distracted by the sound of stifled laughter
upstairs. Probably Gladys and Enid were joking about Bayliss'
being there. How shameless girls were, anyhow!

People came to their front windows to look out as the sleigh
dashed jingling up and down the village streets. When they left
town, Bayliss suggested that they drive out past the Trevor
place. The girls began to talk about the two young New
Englanders, Trevor and Brewster, who had lived there when
Frankfort was still a tough little frontier settlement. Every one
was talking about them now, for a few days ago word had come that
one of the partners, Amos Brewster, had dropped dead in his law
office in Hartford. It was thirty years since he and his friend,
Bruce Trevor, had tried to be great cattle men in Frankfort
county, and had built the house on the round hill east of the
town, where they wasted a great deal of money very joyously.
Claude's father always declared that the amount they squandered
in carousing was negligible compared to their losses in
commendable industrial endeavour. The country, Mr. Wheeler said,
had never been the same since those boys left it. He delighted to
tell about the time when Trevor and Brewster went into sheep.
They imported a breeding ram from Scotland at a great expense,
and when he arrived were so impatient to get the good of him that
they turned him in with the ewes as soon as he was out of his
crate. Consequently all the lambs were born at the wrong season;
came at the beginning of March, in a blinding blizzard, and the
mothers died from exposure. The gallant Trevor took horse and
spurred all over the county, from one little settlement to
another, buying up nursing bottles and nipples to feed the orphan
lambs.

The rich bottom land about the Trevor place had been rented out
to a truck gardener for years now; the comfortable house with its
billiard-room annex--a wonder for that part of the country in
its day--remained closed, its windows boarded up. It sat on the
top of a round knoll, a fine cottonwood grove behind it. Tonight,
as Claude drove toward it, the hill with its tall straight trees
looked like a big fur cap put down on the snow.

"Why hasn't some one bought that house long ago and fixed it up ?"
Enid remarked. "There is no building site around here to compare
with it. It looks like the place where the leading citizen of the
town ought to live."

"I'm glad you like it, Enid," said Bayliss in a guarded voice.
"I've always had a sneaking fancy for the place myself. Those
fellows back there never wanted to sell it. But now the estate's
got to be settled up. I bought it yesterday. The deed is on its
way to Hartford for signature."

Enid turned round in her seat. "Why Bayliss, are you in earnest ?
Think of just buying the Trevor place off-hand, as if it were any
ordinary piece of real estate! Will you make over the house, and
live there some day ?"

"I don't know about living there. It's too far to walk to my
business, and the road across this bottom gets pretty muddy for a
car in the spring."

"But it's not far, less than a mile. If I once owned that spot,
I'd surely never let anybody else live there. Even Carrie
remembers it. She often asks in her letters whether any one has
bought the Trevor place yet."

Carrie Royce, Enid's older sister, was a missionary in China.

"Well," Bayliss admitted, "I didn't buy it for an investment,
exactly. I paid all it was worth."

Enid turned to Gladys, who was apparently not listening. "You'd
be the one who could plan a mansion for Trevor Hill, Gladys. You
always have such original ideas about houses."

"Yes, people who have no houses of their own often seem to have
ideas about building," said Gladys quietly. "But I like the
Trevor place as it is. I hate to think that one of them is dead.
People say they did have such good times up there."

Bayliss grunted. "Call it good times if you like. The kids were
still grubbing whiskey bottles out of the cellar when I first
came to town. Of course, if I decide to live there, I'll pull
down that old trap and put up something modern." He often took
this gruff tone with Gladys in public.

Enid tried to draw the driver into the conversation. "There seems
to be a difference of opinion here, Claude."

"Oh," said Gladys carelessly, "it's Bayliss' property, or soon
will be. He will build what he likes. I've always known somebody
would get that place away from me, so I'm prepared."

"Get it away from you ?" muttered Bayliss, amazed.

"Yes. As long as no one bought it and spoiled it, it was mine as
much as it was anybody's."

"Claude," said Enid banteringly, "now both your brothers have
houses. Where are you going to have yours ?"

"I don't know that I'll ever have one. I think I'll run about the
world a little before I draw my plans," he replied sarcastically.

"Take me with you, Claude!" said Gladys in a tone of sudden
weariness. From that spiritless murmur Enid suspected that
Bayliss had captured Gladys' hand under the buffalo robe.

Grimness had settled down over the sleighing party. Even Enid,
who was not highly sensitive to unuttered feelings, saw that
there was an uncomfortable constraint. A sharp wind had come up.
Bayliss twice suggested turning back, but his brother answered,
"Pretty soon," and drove on. He meant that Bayliss should have
enough of it. Not until Enid whispered reproachfully, "I really
think you ought to turn; we're all getting cold," did he realize
that he had made his sleighing party into a punishment! There was
certainly nothing to punish Enid for; she had done her best, and
had tried to make his own bad manners less conspicuous. He
muttered a blundering apology to her when he lifted her from the
sleigh at the mill house. On his long drive home he had bitter
thoughts for company.

He was so angry with Gladys that he hadn't been able to bid her
good-night. Everything she said on the ride had nettled him. If
she meant to marry Bayliss, then she ought to throw off this
affectation of freedom and independence. If she did not mean to,
why did she accept favours from him and let him get into the
habit of walking into her house and putting his box of candy on
the table, as all Frankfort fellows did when they were courting ?
Certainly she couldn't make herself believe that she liked his
society!

When they were classmates at the Frankfort High School, Gladys
was Claude's aesthetic proxy. It wasn't the proper thing for a
boy to be too clean, or too careful about his dress and manners.
But if he selected a girl who was irreproachable in these
respects, got his Latin and did his laboratory work with her,
then all her personal attractions redounded to his credit. Gladys
had seemed to appreciate the honour Claude did her, and it was
not all on her own account that she wore such beautifully ironed
muslin dresses when they went on botanical expeditions.

Driving home after that miserable sleigh-ride, Claude told
himself that in so far as Gladys was concerned he could make up
his mind to the fact that he had been "stung" all along. He had
believed in her fine feelings; believed implicitly. Now he knew
she had none so fine that she couldn't pocket them when there was
enough to be gained by it. Even while he said these things over
and over, his old conception of Gladys, down at the bottom of his
mind, remained persistently unchanged. But that only made his
state of feeling the more painful. He was deeply hurt,--and for
some reason, youth, when it is hurt, likes to feel itself
betrayed.


Book Two: Enid

I

One afternoon that spring Claude was sitting on the long flight
of granite steps that leads up to the State House in Denver. He
had been looking at the collection of Cliff Dweller remains in
the Capitol, and when he came out into the sunlight the faint
smell of fresh-cut grass struck his nostrils and persuaded him to
linger. The gardeners were giving the grounds their first light
mowing. All the lawns on the hill were bright with daffodils and
hyacinths. A sweet, warm wind blew over the grass, drying the
waterdrops. There had been showers in the afternoon, and the sky
was still a tender, rainy blue, where it showed through the
masses of swiftly moving clouds.

Claude had been away from home for nearly a month. His father had
sent him out to see Ralph and the new ranch, and from there he
went on to Colorado Springs and Trinidad. He had enjoyed
travelling, but now that he was back in Denver he had that
feeling of loneliness which often overtakes country boys in a
city; the feeling of being unrelated to anything, of not
mattering to anybody. He had wandered about Colorado Springs
wishing he knew some of the people who were going in and out of
the houses; wishing that he could talk to some of those pretty
girls he saw driving their own cars about the streets, if only to
say a few words. One morning when he was walking out in the hills
a girl passed him, then slowed her car to ask if she could give
him a lift. Claude would have said that she was just the sort who
would never stop to pick him up, yet she did, and she talked to
him pleasantly all the way back to town. It was only twenty
minutes or so, but it was worth everything else that happened on
his trip. When she asked him where she should put him down, he
said at the Antlers, and blushed so furiously that she must have
known at once he wasn't staying there.

He wondered this afternoon how many discouraged young men had sat
here on the State House steps and watched the sun go down behind
the mountains. Every one was always saying it was a fine thing to
be young; but it was a painful thing, too. He didn't believe
older people were ever so wretched. Over there, in the golden
light, the mass of mountains was splitting up into four distinct
ranges, and as the sun dropped lower the peaks emerged in
perspective, one behind the other. It was a lonely splendour that
only made the ache in his breast the stronger. What was the
matter with him, he asked himself entreatingly. He must answer
that question before he went home again.

The statue of Kit Carson on horseback, down in the Square,
pointed Westward; but there was no West, in that sense, any more.
There was still South America; perhaps he could find something
below the Isthmus. Here the sky was like a lid shut down over the
world; his mother could see saints and martyrs behind it.

Well, in time he would get over all this, he supposed. Even his
father had been restless as a young man, and had run away into a
new country. It was a storm that died down at last,--but what a
pity not to do anything with it! A waste of power--for it was a
kind of power; he sprang to his feet and stood frowning against
the ruddy light, so deep in his struggling thoughts that he did
not notice a man, mounting from the lower terraces, who stopped
to look at him.

The stranger scrutinized Claude with interest. He saw a young man
standing bareheaded on the long flight of steps, his fists
clenched in an attitude of arrested action,--his sandy hair, his
tanned face, his tense figure copper-coloured in the oblique
rays. Claude would have been astonished if he could have known
how he seemed to this stranger.


II

The next morning Claude stepped off the train at Frankfort and
had his breakfast at the station before the town was awake. His
family were not expecting him, so he thought he would walk home
and stop at the mill to see Enid Royce. After all, old friends
were best.

He left town by the low road that wound along the creek. The
willows were all out in new yellow leaves, and the sticky
cotton-wood buds were on the point of bursting. Birds were
calling everywhere, and now and then, through the studded willow
wands, flashed the dazzling wing of a cardinal.

All over the dusty, tan-coloured wheatfields there was a tender
mist of green,--millions of little fingers reaching up and waving
lightly in the sun. To the north and south Claude could see the
corn-planters, moving in straight lines over the brown acres
where the earth had been harrowed so fine that it blew off in
clouds of dust to the roadside. When a gust of wind rose, gay
little twisters came across the open fields, corkscrews of
powdered earth that whirled through the air and suddenly fell
again. It seemed as if there were a lark on every fence post,
singing for everything that was dumb; for the great ploughed
lands, and the heavy horses in the rows, and the men guiding the
horses.

Along the roadsides, from under the dead weeds and wisps of dried
bluestem, the dandelions thrust up their clean, bright faces. If
Claude happened to step on one, the acrid smell made him think of
Mahailey, who had probably been out this very morning, gouging
the sod with her broken butcher knife and stuffing dandelion
greens into her apron. She always went for greens with an air of
secrecy, very early, and sneaked along the roadsides stooping
close to the ground, as if she might be detected and driven away,
or as if the dandelions were wild things and had to be caught
sleeping.

Claude was thinking, as he walked, of how he used to like to come
to mill with his father. The whole process of milling was
mysterious to him then; and the mill house and the miller's wife
were mysterious; even Enid was, a little--until he got her down
in the bright sun among the cat-tails. They used to play in the
bins of clean wheat, watch the flour coming out of the hopper and
get themselves covered with white dust.

Best of all he liked going in where the water-wheel hung dripping
in its dark cave, and quivering streaks of sunlight came in
through the cracks to play on the green slime and the spotted
jewel-weed growing in the shale. The mill was a place of sharp
contrasts; bright sun and deep shade, roaring sound and heavy,
dripping silence. He remembered how astonished he was one day,
when he found Mr. Royce in gloves and goggles, cleaning the
millstones, and discovered what harmless looking things they
were. The miller picked away at them with a sharp hammer until
the sparks flew, and Claude still had on his hand a blue spot
where a chip of flint went under the skin when he got too near.

Jason Royce must have kept his mill going out of sentiment, for
there was not much money in it now. But milling had been his
first business, and he had not found many things in life to be
sentimental about. Sometimes one still came upon him in dusty
miller's clothes, giving his man a day off. He had long ago
ceased to depend on the risings and fallings of Lovely Creek for
his power, and had put in a gasoline engine. The old dam now lay
"like a holler tooth," as one of his men said, grown up with
weeds and willow-brush.

Mr. Royce's family affairs had never gone as well as his
business. He had not been blessed with a son, and out of five
daughters he had succeeded in bringing up only two. People
thought the mill house damp and unwholesome. Until he built a
tenant's cottage and got a married man to take charge of the
mill, Mr. Royce was never able to keep his millers long. They
complained of the gloom of the house, and said they could not get
enough to eat. Mrs. Royce went every summer to a vegetarian
sanatorium in Michigan, where she learned to live on nuts and
toasted cereals. She gave her family nourishment, to be sure, but
there was never during the day a meal that a man could look
forward to with pleasure, or sit down to with satisfaction. Mr.
Royce usually dined at the hotel in town. Nevertheless, his wife
was distinguished for certain brilliant culinary accomplishments.
Her bread was faultless. When a church supper was toward, she was
always called upon for her wonderful mayonnaise dressing, or her
angel-food cake,--sure to be the lightest and spongiest in any
assemblage of cakes.

A deep preoccupation about her health made Mrs. Royce like a
woman who has a hidden grief, or is preyed upon by a consuming
regret. It wrapped her in a kind of insensibility. She lived
differently from other people, and that fact made her distrustful
and reserved. Only when she was at the sanatorium, under the care
of her idolized doctors, did she feel that she was understood and
surrounded by sympathy.

Her distrust had communicated itself to her daughters and in
countless little ways had coloured their feelings about life.
They grew up under the shadow of being "different," and formed no
close friendships. Gladys Farmer was the only Frankfort girl who
had ever gone much to the mill house. Nobody was surprised when
Caroline Royce, the older daughter, went out to China to be a
missionary, or that her mother let her go without a protest. The
Royce women were strange, anyhow, people said; with Carrie gone,
they hoped Enid would grow up to be more like other folk. She
dressed well, came to town often in her car, and was always ready
to work for the church or the public library.

Besides, in Frankfort, Enid was thought very pretty,--in itself a
humanizing attribute. She was slender, with a small, well-shaped
head, a smooth, pale skin, and large, dark, opaque eyes with
heavy lashes. The long line from the lobe of her ear to the tip
of her chin gave her face a certain rigidity, but to the old
ladies, who are the best critics in such matters, this meant
firmness and dignity. She moved quickly and gracefully, just
brushing things rather than touching them, so that there was a
suggestion of flight about her slim figure, of gliding away from
her surroundings. When the Sunday School gave tableaux vivants,
Enid was chosen for Nydia, the blind girl of Pompeii, and for the
martyr in "Christ or Diana." The pallor of her skin, the
submissive inclination of her forehead, and her dark, unchanging
eyes, made one think of something "early Christian."

On this May morning when Claude Wheeler came striding up the mill
road, Enid was in the yard, standing by a trellis for vines built
near the fence, out from under the heavy shade of the trees. She
was raking the earth that had been spaded up the day before, and
making furrows in which to drop seeds. From the turn of the road,
by the knotty old willows, Claude saw her pink starched dress and
little white sun-bonnet. He hurried forward.

"Hello, are you farming ?" he called as he came up to the fence.

Enid, who was bending over at that moment, rose quickly, but
without a start. "Why, Claude! I thought you were out West
somewhere. This is a surprise!" She brushed the earth from her
hands and gave him her limp white fingers. Her arms, bare below
the elbow, were thin, and looked cold, as if she had put on a
summer dress too early.

"I just got back this morning. I'm walking out home. What are you
planting ?"

"Sweet peas."

"You always have the finest ones in the country. When I see a
bunch of yours at church or anywhere, I always know them."

"Yes, I'm quite successful with my sweet peas," she admitted.
"The ground is rich down here, and they get plenty of sun."

"It isn't only your sweet peas. Nobody else has such lilacs or
rambler roses, and I expect you have the only wistaria vine in
Frankfort county."

"Mother planted that a long while ago, when she first moved here.
She is very partial to wistaria. I'm afraid we'll lose it, one of
these hard winters."

"Oh, that would be a shame! Take good care of it. You must put in
a lot of time looking after these things, anyway." He spoke
admiringly.

Enid leaned against the fence and pushed back her little bonnet.
"Perhaps I take more interest in flowers than I do in people. I
often envy you, Claude; you have so many interests."

He coloured. "I ? Good gracious, I don't have many! I'm an awfully
discontented sort of fellow. I didn't care about going to school
until I had to stop, and then I was sore because I couldn't go
back. I guess I've been sulking about it all winter."

She looked at him with quiet astonishment. "I don't see why you
should be discontented; you're so free."

"Well, aren't you free, too ?"

"Not to do what I want to. The only thing I really want to do is
to go out to China and help Carrie in her work. Mother thinks I'm
not strong enough. But Carrie was never very strong here. She is
better in China, and I think I might be."

Claude felt concern. He had not seen Enid since the sleigh-ride,
when she had been gayer than usual. Now she seemed sunk in
lassitude. "You must get over such notions, Enid. You don't want
to go wandering off alone like that. It makes people queer. Isn't
there plenty of missionary work to be done right here ?"

She sighed. "That's what everybody says. But we all of us have a
chance, if we'll take it. Out there they haven't. It's terrible
to think of all those millions that live and die in darkness."

Claude glanced up at the sombre mill house, hidden in
cedars,--then off at the bright, dusty fields. He felt as if he
were a little to blame for Enid's melancholy. He hadn't been very
neighbourly this last year. "People can live in darkness here,
too, unless they fight it. Look at me. I told you I've been
moping all winter. We all feel friendly enough, but we go
plodding on and never get together. You and I are old friends,
and yet we hardly ever see each other. Mother says you've been
promising for two years to run up and have a visit with her. Why
don't you come ? It would please her."

"Then I will. I've always been fond of your mother." She paused a
moment, absently twisting the strings of her bonnet, then
twitched it from her head with a quick movement and looked at him
squarely in the bright light. "Claude, you haven't really become
a free-thinker, have you ?"

He laughed outright. "Why, what made you think I had ?"

"Everybody knows Ernest Havel is, and people say you and he read
that kind of books together."

"Has that got anything to do with our being friends ?"

"Yes, it has. I couldn't feel the same confidence in you. I've
worried about it a good deal."

"Well, you just cut it out. For one thing, I'm not worth it," he
said quickly.

"Oh, yes, you are! If worrying would do any good--" she shook her
head at him reproachfully.

Claude took hold of the fence pickets between them with both
hands. "It will do good! Didn't I tell you there was missionary
work to be done right here ? Is that why you've been so
stand-offish with me the last few years, because you thought I
was an atheist ?"

"I never, you know, liked Ernest Havel," she murmured.

When Claude left the mill and started homeward he felt that he
had found something which would help him through the summer. How
fortunate he had been to come upon Enid alone and talk to her
without interruption,--without once seeing Mrs. Royce's face,
always masked in powder, peering at him from behind a drawn
blind. Mrs. Royce had always looked old, even long ago when she
used to come into church with her little girls,--a tiny woman in
tiny high-heeled shoes and a big hat with nodding plumes, her
black dress covered with bugles and jet that glittered and
rattled and made her seem hard on the outside, like an insect.

Yes, he must see to it that Enid went about and saw more of other
people. She was too much with her mother, and with her own
thoughts. Flowers and foreign missions--her garden and the great
kingdom of China; there was something unusual and touching about
her preoccupations. Something quite charming, too. Women ought to
be religious; faith was the natural fragrance of their minds. The
more incredible the things they believed, the more lovely was the
act of belief. To him the story of "Paradise Lost" was as
mythical as the "Odyssey"; yet when his mother read it aloud to
him, it was not only beautiful but true. A woman who didn't have
holy thoughts about mysterious things far away would be prosaic
and commonplace, like a man.


III

During the next few weeks Claude often ran his car down to the
mill house on a pleasant evening and coaxed Enid to go into
Frankfort with him and sit through a moving picture show, or to
drive to a neighbouring town. The advantage of this form of
companionship was that it did not put too great a strain upon
one's conversational powers. Enid could be admirably silent, and
she was never embarrassed by either silence or speech. She was
cool and sure of herself under any circumstances, and that was
one reason why she drove a car so well,--much better than Claude,
indeed.

One Sunday, when they met after church, she told Claude that she
wanted to go to Hastings to do some shopping, and they arranged
that he should take her on Tuesday in his father's big car. The
town was about seventy miles to the northeast and, from
Frankfort, it was an inconvenient trip by rail.

On Tuesday morning Claude reached the mill house just as the sun
was rising over the damp fields. Enid was on the front porch
waiting for him, wearing a blanket coat over her spring suit. She
ran down to the gate and slipped into the seat beside him.

"Good morning, Claude. Nobody else is up. It's going to be a
glorious day, isn't it ?"

"Splendid. A little warm for this time of year. You won't need
that coat long."

For the first hour they found the roads empty. All the fields
were grey with dew, and the early sunlight burned over everything
with the transparent brightness of a fire that has just been
kindled. As the machine noiselessly wound off the miles, the sky
grew deeper and bluer, and the flowers along the roadside opened
in the wet grass. There were men and horses abroad on every hill
now. Soon they began to pass children on the way to school, who
stopped and waved their bright dinner pails at the two
travellers. By ten o'clock they were in Hastings.

While Enid was shopping, Claude bought some white shoes and duck
trousers. He felt more interest than usual in his summer clothes.
They met at the hotel for lunch, both very hungry and both
satisfied with their morning's work. Seated in the dining room,
with Enid opposite him, Claude thought they did not look at all
like a country boy and girl come to town, but like experienced
people touring in their car.

"Will you make a call with me after dinner ?" she asked while they
were waiting for their dessert.

"Is it any one I know ?"

"Certainly. Brother Weldon is in town. His meetings are over, and
I was afraid he might be gone, but he is staying on a few days
with Mrs. Gleason. I brought some of Carrie's letters along for
him to read."

Claude made a wry face. "He won't be delighted to see me. We
never got on well at school. He's a regular muff of a teacher, if
you want to know," he added resolutely.

Enid studied him judicially. "I'm surprised to hear that; he's
such a good speaker. You'd better come along. It's so foolish to
have a coolness with your old teachers."

An hour later the Reverend Arthur Weldon received the two young
people in Mrs. Gleason's half-darkened parlour, where he seemed
quite as much at home as that lady herself. The hostess, after
chatting cordially with the visitors for a few moments, excused
herself to go to a P. E. O. meeting. Every one rose at her
departure, and Mr. Weldon approached Enid, took her hand, and
stood looking at her with his head inclined and his oblique
smile. "This is an unexpected pleasure, to see you again, Miss
Enid. And you, too, Claude," turning a little toward the latter.
"You've come up from Frankfort together this beautiful day ?" His
tone seemed to say, "How lovely for you!"

He directed most of his remarks to Enid and, as always, avoided
looking at Claude except when he definitely addressed him.

"You are farming this year, Claude ? I presume that is a great
satisfaction to your father. And Mrs. Wheeler is quite well ?"

Mr. Weldon certainly bore no malice, but he always pronounced
Claude's name exactly like the word "Clod," which annoyed him. To
be sure, Enid pronounced his name in the same way, but either
Claude did not notice this, or did not mind it from her. He sank
into a deep, dark sofa, and sat with his driving cap on his knee
while Brother Weldon drew a chair up to the one open window of
the dusky room and began to read Carrie Royce's letters. Without
being asked to do so, he read them aloud, and stopped to comment
from time to time. Claude observed with disappointment that Enid
drank in all his platitudes just as Mrs. Wheeler did. He had
never looked at Weldon so long before. The light fell full on the
young man's pear-shaped head and his thin, rippled hair. What in
the world could sensible women like his mother and Enid Royce
find to admire in this purring, white-necktied fellow ? Enid's
dark eyes rested upon him with an expression of profound respect.
She both looked at him and spoke to him with more feeling than
she ever showed toward Claude.

"You see, Brother Weldon," she said earnestly, "I am not
naturally much drawn to people. I find it hard to take the proper
interest in the church work at home. It seems as if I had always
been holding myself in reserve for the foreign field,--by not
making personal ties, I mean. If Gladys Farmer went to China,
everybody would miss her. She could never be replaced in the High
School. She has the kind of magnetism that draws people to her.
But I have always been keeping myself free to do what Carrie is
doing. There I know I could be of use."

Claude saw it was not easy for Enid to talk like this. Her face
looked troubled, and her dark eyebrows came together in a sharp
angle as she tried to tell the young preacher exactly what was
going on in her mind. He listened with his habitual, smiling
attention, smoothing the paper of the folded letter pages and
murmuring, "Yes, I understand. Indeed, Miss Enid ?"

When she pressed him for advice, he said it was not always easy
to know in what field one could be most useful; perhaps this very
restraint was giving her some spiritual discipline that she
particularly needed. He was careful not to commit himself, not to
advise anything unconditionally, except prayer.

"I believe that all things are made clear to us in prayer, Miss
Enid."

Enid clasped her hands; her perplexity made her features look
sharper. "But it is when I pray that I feel this call the
strongest. It seems as if a finger were pointing me over there.
Sometimes when I ask for guidance in little things, I get none,
and only get the feeling that my work lies far away, and that for
it, strength would be given me. Until I take that road, Christ
withholds himself."

Mr. Weldon answered her in a tone of relief, as if something
obscure had been made clear. "If that is the case, Miss Enid, I
think we need have no anxiety. If the call recurs to you in
prayer, and it is your Saviour's will, then we can be sure that
the way and the means will be revealed. A passage from one of the
Prophets occurs to me at this moment; 'And behold a way shall be
opened up before thy feet; walk thou in it.' We might say that
this promise was originally meant for Enid Royce! I believe God
likes us to appropriate passages of His word personally." This
last remark was made playfully, as if it were a kind of Christian
Endeavour jest. He rose and handed Enid back the letters.
Clearly, the interview was over.

As Enid drew on her gloves she told him that it had been a great
help to talk to him, and that he always seemed to give her what
she needed. Claude wondered what it was. He hadn't seen Weldon do
anything but retreat before her eager questions. He, an
"atheist," could have given her stronger reinforcement.

Claude's car stood under the maple trees in front of Mrs.
Gleason's house. Before they got into it, he called Enid's
attention to a mass of thunderheads in the west.

"That looks to me like a storm. It might be a wise thing to stay
at the hotel tonight."

"Oh, no! I don't want to do that. I haven't come prepared."

He reminded her that it wouldn't be impossible to buy whatever
she might need for the night.

"I don't like to stay in a strange place without my own things,"
she said decidedly.

"I'm afraid we'll be going straight into it. We may be in for
something pretty rough,--but it's as you say." He still
hesitated, with his hand on the door.

"I think we'd better try it," she said with quiet determination.
Claude had not yet learned that Enid always opposed the
unexpected, and could not bear to have her plans changed by
people or circumstances.

For an hour he drove at his best speed, watching the clouds
anxiously. The table-land, from horizon to horizon, was glowing
in sunlight, and the sky itself seemed only the more brilliant
for the mass of purple vapours rolling in the west, with bright
edges, like new-cut lead. He had made fifty odd miles when the
air suddenly grew cold, and in ten minutes the whole shining sky
was blotted out. He sprang to the ground and began to jack up his
wheels. As soon as a wheel left the earth, Enid adjusted the
chain. Claude told her he had never got the chains on so quickly
before. He covered the packages in the back seat with an oilcloth
and drove forward to meet the storm.

The rain swept over them in waves, seemed to rise from the sod as
well as to fall from the clouds. They made another five miles,
ploughing through puddles and sliding over liquefied roads.
Suddenly the heavy car, chains and all, bounded up a two-foot
bank, shot over the sod a dozen yards before the brake caught it,
then swung a half-circle and stood still. Enid sat calm and
motionless.

Claude drew a long breath. "If that had happened on a culvert,
we'd be in the ditch with the car on top of us. I simply can't
control the thing. The whole top soil is loose, and there's
nothing to hold to. That's Tommy Rice's place over there. We'd
better get him to take us in for the night."

"But that would be worse than the hotel," Enid objected. "They
are not very clean people, and there are a lot of children."

"Better be crowded than dead," he murmured. "From here on, it
would be a matter of luck. We might land anywhere."

"We are only about ten miles from your place. I can stay with
your mother tonight."

"It's too dangerous, Enid. I don't like the responsibility. Your
father would blame me for taking such a chance."

"I know, it's on my account you're nervous." Enid spoke
reasonably enough. "Do you mind letting me drive for awhile ?
There are only three bad hills left, and I think I can slide down
them sideways; I've often tried it."

Claude got out and let her slip into his seat, but after she took
the wheel he put his hand on her arm. "Don't do anything so
foolish," he pleaded.

Enid smiled and shook her head. She was amiable, but inflexible.

He folded his arms. "Go on."

He was chafed by her stubbornness, but he had to admire her
resourcefulness in handling the car. At the bottom of one of the
worst hills was a new cement culvert, overlaid with liquid mud,
where there was nothing for the chains to grip. The car slid to
the edge of the culvert and stopped on the very brink. While they
were ploughing up the other side of the hill, Enid remarked;
"It's a good thing your starter works well; a little jar would
have thrown us over."

They pulled up at the Wheeler farm just before dark, and Mrs.
Wheeler came running out to meet them with a rubber coat over her
head.

"You poor drowned children!" she cried, taking Enid in her arms.
"How did you ever get home ? I so hoped you had stayed in
Hastings."

"It was Enid who got us home," Claude told her. "She's a
dreadfully foolhardy girl, and somebody ought to shake her, but
she's a fine driver."

Enid laughed as she brushed a wet lock back from her forehead.
"You were right, of course; the sensible thing would have been to
turn in at the Rice place; only I didn't want to."

Later in the evening Claude was glad they hadn't. It was pleasant
to be at home and to see Enid at the supper table, sitting on his
father's right and wearing one of his mother's new grey
house-dresses. They would have had a dismal time at the Rices',
with no beds to sleep in except such as were already occupied by
Rice children. Enid had never slept in his mother's guest room
before, and it pleased him to think how comfortable she would be
there.

At an early hour Mrs. Wheeler took a candle to light her guest to
bed; Enid passed near Claude's chair as she was leaving the room.
"Have you forgiven me ?" she asked teasingly.

"What made you so pig-headed ? Did you want to frighten me ? or to
show me how well you could drive ?"

"Neither. I wanted to get home. Good-night."

Claude settled back in his chair and shaded his eyes. She did
feel that this was home, then. She had not been afraid of his
father's jokes, or disconcerted by Mahailey's knowing grin. Her
ease in the household gave him unaccountable pleasure. He picked
up a book, but did not read. It was lying open on his knee when
his mother came back half an hour later.

"Move quietly when you go upstairs, Claude. She is so tired that
she may be asleep already."

He took off his shoes and made his ascent with the utmost
caution.



IV

Ernest Havel was cultivating his bright, glistening young
cornfield one summer morning, whistling to himself an old German
song which was somehow connected with a picture that rose in his
memory. It was a picture of the earliest ploughing he could
remember.

He saw a half-circle of green hills, with snow still lingering in
the clefts of the higher ridges; behind the hills rose a wall of
sharp mountains, covered with dark pine forests. In the meadows
at the foot of that sweep of hills there was a winding creek,
with polled willows in their first yellow-green, and brown
fields. He himself was a little boy, playing by the creek and
watching his father and mother plough with two great oxen, that
had rope traces fastened to their heads and their long horns. His
mother walked barefoot beside the oxen and led them; his father
walked behind, guiding the plough. His father always looked down.
His mother's face was almost as brown and furrowed as the fields,
and her eyes were pale blue, like the skies of early spring. The
two would go up and down thus all morning without speaking,
except to the oxen. Ernest was the last of a long family, and as
he played by the creek he used to wonder why his parents looked
so old.

Leonard Dawson drove his car up to the fence and shouted, waking
Ernest from his revery. He told his team to stand, and ran out to
the edge of the field.

"Hello, Ernest," Leonard called. "Have you heard Claude Wheeler
got hurt day before yesterday ?"

"You don't say so! It can't be anything bad, or they'd let me
know."

"Oh, it's nothing very bad, I guess, but he got his face
scratched up in the wire quite a little. It was the queerest
thing I ever saw. He was out with the team of mules and a heavy
plough, working the road in that deep cut between their place and
mine. The gasoline motor-truck came along, making more noise than
usual, maybe. But those mules know a motor truck, and what they
did was pure cussedness. They begun to rear and plunge in that
deep cut. I was working my corn over in the field and shouted to
the gasoline man to stop, but he didn't hear me. Claude jumped
for the critters' heads and got 'em by the bits, but by that time
he was all tangled up in the lines. Those damned mules lifted him
off his feet and started to run. Down the draw and up the bank
and across the fields they went, with that big plough-blade
jumping three or four feet in the air every clip. I was sure it
would cut one of the mules open, or go clean through Claude. It
would have got him, too, if he hadn't kept his hold on the bits.
They carried him right along, swinging in the air, and finally
ran him into the barb-wire fence and cut his face and neck up."

"My goodness! Did he get cut bad ?"

"No, not very, but yesterday morning he was out cultivating corn,
all stuck up with court plaster. I knew that was a fool thing to
do; a wire cut's nasty if you get overheated out in the dust. But
you can't tell a Wheeler anything. Now they say his face has
swelled and is hurting him terrible, and he's gone to town to see
the doctor. You'd better go over there tonight, and see if you
can make him take care of himself."

Leonard drove on, and Ernest went back to his team. "It's queer
about that boy," he was thinking. "He's big and strong, and he's
got an education and all that fine land, but he don't seem to fit
in right." Sometimes Ernest thought his friend was unlucky. When
that idea occurred to him, he sighed and shook it off. For Ernest
believed there was no help for that; it was something rationalism
did not explain.

The next afternoon Enid Royce's coupe drove up to the Wheeler
farmyard. Mrs. Wheeler saw Enid get out of her car and came down
the hill to meet her, breathless and distressed. "Oh, Enid!
You've heard of Claude's accident ? He wouldn't take care of
himself, and now he's got erysipelas. He's in such pain, poor
boy!"

Enid took her arm, and they started up the hill toward the house.
"Can I see Claude, Mrs. Wheeler ? I want to give him these
flowers."

Mrs. Wheeler hesitated. "I don't know if he will let you come in,
dear. I had hard work persuading him to see Ernest for a few
moments last night. He seems so low-spirited, and he's sensitive
about the way he's bandaged up. I'll go to his room and ask him."

"No, just let me go up with you, please. If I walk in with you,
he won't have time to fret about it. I won't stay if he doesn't
wish it, but I want to see him."

Mrs. Wheeler was alarmed at this suggestion, but Enid ignored her
uncertainty. They went up to the third floor together, and Enid
herself tapped at the door.

"It's I, Claude. May I come in for a moment ?"

A muffled, reluctant voice answered. "No. They say this is
catching, Enid. And anyhow, I'd rather you didn't see me like
this."

Without waiting she pushed open the door. The dark blinds were
down, and the room was full of a strong, bitter odor. Claude lay
flat in bed, his head and face so smothered in surgical cotton
that only his eyes and the tip of his nose were visible. The
brown paste with which his features were smeared oozed out at the
edges of the gauze and made his dressings look untidy. Enid took
in these details at a glance.

"Does the light hurt your eyes ? Let me put up one of the blinds
for a moment, because I want you to see these flowers. I've
brought you my first sweet peas."

Claude blinked at the bunch of bright colours she held out before
him. She put them up to his face and asked him if he could smell
them through his medicines. In a moment he ceased to feel
embarrassed. His mother brought a glass bowl, and Enid arranged
the flowers on the little table beside him.

"Now, do you want me to darken the room again ?"

"Not yet. Sit down for a minute and talk to me. I can't say much
because my face is stiff."

"I should think it would be! I met Leonard Dawson on the road
yesterday, and he told me how you worked in the field after you
were cut. I would like to scold you hard, Claude."

"Do. It might make me feel better." He took her hand and kept her
beside him a moment. "Are those the sweet peas you were planting
that day when I came back from the West ?"

"Yes. Haven't they done well to blossom so early ?"

"Less than two months. That's strange," he sighed.

"Strange ? What ?"

"Oh, that a handful of seeds can make anything so pretty in a few
weeks, and it takes a man so long to do anything and then it's
not much account."

"That's not the way to look at things," she said reprovingly.

Enid sat prim and straight on a chair at the foot of his bed. Her
flowered organdie dress was very much like the bouquet she had
brought, and her floppy straw hat had a big lilac bow. She began
to tell Claude about her father's several attacks of erysipelas.
He listened but absently. He would never have believed that Enid,
with her severe notions of decorum, would come into his room and
sit with him like this. He noticed that his mother was quite as
much astonished as he. She hovered about the visitor for a few
moments, and then, seeing that Enid was quite at her ease, went
downstairs to her work. Claude wished that Enid would not talk at
all, but would sit there and let him look at her. The sunshine
she had let into the room, and her tranquil, fragrant presence,
soothed him. Presently he realized that she was asking him
something.

"What is it, Enid ? The medicine they give me makes me stupid. I
don't catch things."

"I was asking whether you play chess."

"Very badly."

"Father says I play passably well. When you are better you must
let me bring up my ivory chessmen that Carrie sent me from China.
They are beautifully carved. And now it's time for me to go."

She rose and patted his hand, telling him he must not be foolish
about seeing people. "I didn't know you were so vain. Bandages
are as becoming to you as they are to anybody. Shall I pull the
dark blind again for you ?"

"Yes, please. There won't be anything to look at now."

"Why, Claude, you are getting to be quite a ladies' man!"

Something in the way Enid said this made him wince a little. He
felt his burning face grow a shade warmer. Even after she went
downstairs he kept wishing she had not said that.

His mother came to give him his medicine. She stood beside him
while he swallowed it. "Enid Royce is a real sensible girl--" she
said as she took the glass. Her upward inflection expressed not
conviction but bewilderment.

Enid came every afternoon, and Claude looked forward to her
visits restlessly; they were the only pleasant things that
happened to him, and made him forget the humiliation of his
poisoned and disfigured face. He was disgusting to himself; when
he touched the welts on his forehead and under his hair, he felt
unclean and abject. At night, when his fever ran high, and the
pain began to tighten in his head and neck, it wrought him to a
distressing pitch of excitement. He fought with it as one bulldog
fights with another. His mind prowled about among dark legends of
torture,--everything he had ever read about the Inquisition, the
rack and the wheel.

When Enid entered his room, cool and fresh in her pretty summer
clothes, his mind leaped to meet her. He could not talk much, but
he lay looking at her and breathing in a sweet contentment. After
awhile he was well enough to sit up half-dressed in a steamer
chair and play chess with her.

One afternoon they were by the west window in the sitting-room
with the chess board between them, and Claude had to admit that
he was beaten again.

"It must be dull for you, playing with me," he murmured, brushing
the beads of sweat from his forehead. His face was clean now, so
white that even his freckles had disappeared, and his hands were
the soft, languid hands of a sick man.

"You will play better when you are stronger and can fix your mind
on it," Enid assured him. She was puzzled because Claude, who had
a good head for some things, had none at all for chess, and it
was clear that he would never play well.

"Yes," he sighed, dropping back into his chair, "my wits do
wander. Look at my wheatfield, over there on the skyline. Isn't
it lovely ? And now I won't be able to harvest it. Sometimes I
wonder whether I'll ever finish anything I begin."

Enid put the chessmen back into their box. "Now that you are
better, you must stop feeling blue. Father says that with your
trouble people are always depressed."

Claude shook his head slowly, as it lay against the back of the
chair. "No, it's not that. It's having so much time to think that
makes me blue. You see, Enid, I've never yet done anything that
gave me any satisfaction. I must be good for something. When I
lie still and think, I wonder whether my life has been happening
to me or to somebody else. It doesn't seem to have much
connection with me. I haven't made much of a start."

"But you are not twenty-two yet. You have plenty of time to
start. Is that what you are thinking about all the time!" She
shook her finger at him.

"I think about two things all the time. That is one of them."
Mrs. Wheeler came in with Claude's four o'clock milk; it was his
first day downstairs.

When they were children, playing by the mill-dam, Claude had seen
the future as a luminous vagueness in which he and Enid would
always do things together. Then there came a time when he wanted
to do everything with Ernest, when girls were disturbing and a
bother, and he pushed all that into the distance, knowing that
some day he must reckon with it again.

Now he told himself he had always known Enid would come back; and
she had come on that afternoon when she entered his drug-smelling
room and let in the sunlight. She would have done that for nobody
but him. She was not a girl who would depart lightly from
conventions that she recognized as authoritative. He remembered
her as she used to march up to the platform for Children's Day
exercises with the other little girls of the infant class; in her
stiff white dress, never a curl awry or a wrinkle in her
stocking, keeping her little comrades in order by the acquiescent
gravity of her face, which seemed to say, "How pleasant it is to
do thus and to do Right!"

Old Mr. Smith was the minister in those days,--a good man who had
been much tossed about by a stormy and temperamental wife--and his
eyes used to rest yearningly upon little Enid Royce, seeing in
her the promise of "virtuous and comely Christian womanhood," to
use one of his own phrases. Claude, in the boys' class across the
aisle, used to tease her and try to distract her, but he
respected her seriousness.

When they played together she was fair-minded, didn't whine if
she got hurt, and never claimed a girl's exemption from anything
unpleasant. She was calm, even on the day when she fell into the
mill-dam and he fished her out; as soon as she stopped choking
and coughing up muddy water, she wiped her face with her little
drenched petticoats, and sat shivering and saying over and over,
"Oh, Claude, Claude!" Incidents like that one now seemed to him
significant and fateful.

When Claude's strength began to return to him, it came
overwhelmingly. His blood seemed to grow strong while his body
was still weak, so that the in-rush of vitality shook him. The
desire to live again sang in his veins while his frame was
unsteady. Waves of youth swept over him and left him exhausted.
When Enid was with him these feelings were never so strong; her
actual presence restored his equilibrium--almost. This fact did
not perplex him; he fondly attributed it to something beautiful
in the girl's nature,--a quality so lovely and subtle that there
is no name for it.

During the first days of his recovery he did nothing but enjoy
the creeping stir of life. Respiration was a soft physical
pleasure. In the nights, so long he could not sleep them through,
it was delightful to lie upon a cloud that floated lazily down
the sky. In the depths of this lassitude the thought of Enid
would start up like a sweet, burning pain, and he would drift out
into the darkness upon sensations he could neither prevent nor
control. So long as he could plough, pitch hay, or break his back
in the wheatfield, he had been master; but now he was overtaken
by himself. Enid was meant for him and she had come for him; he
would never let her go. She should never know how much he longed
for her. She would be slow to feel even a little of what he was
feeling; he knew that. It would take a long while. But he would
be infinitely patient, infinitely tender of her. It should be he
who suffered, not she. Even in his dreams he never wakened her,
but loved her while she was still and unconscious like a statue.
He would shed love upon her until she warmed and changed without
knowing why.

Sometimes when Enid sat unsuspecting beside him, a quick blush
swept across his face and he felt guilty toward her, meek and
humble, as if he must beg her forgiveness for something. Often he
was glad when she went away and left him alone to think about
her. Her presence brought him sanity, and for that he ought to be
grateful. When he was with her, he thought how she was to be the
one who would put him right with the world and make him fit into
the life about him. He had troubled his mother and disappointed
his father, His marriage would be the first natural, dutiful,
expected thing he had ever done. It would be the beginning of
usefulness and content; as his mother's oft-repeated Psalm said,
it would restore his soul. Enid's willingness to listen to him he
could scarcely doubt. Her devotion to him during his illness was
probably regarded by her friends as equivalent to an engagement.



V

Claude's first trip to Frankfort was to get his hair cut. After
leaving the barber-shop he presented himself, glistening with
bayrum, at Jason Royce's office. Mr. Royce, in the act of closing
his safe, turned and took the young man by the hand.

"Hello, Claude, glad to see you around again! Sickness can't do
much to a husky young farmer like you. With old fellows, it's
another story. I'm just starting off to have a look at my
alfalfa, south of the river. Get in and go along with me."

They went out to the open car that stood by the sidewalk, and
when they were spinning along between fields of ripening grain
Claude broke the silence. "I expect you know what I want to see
you about, Mr. Royce ?"

The older man shook his head. He had been preoccupied and grim
ever since they started.

"Well," Claude went on modestly, "it oughtn't to surprise you to
hear that I've set my heart on Enid. I haven't said anything to
her yet, but if you're not against me, I'm going to try to
persuade her to marry me."

"Marriage is a final sort of thing, Claude," said Mr. Royce. He
sat slumping in his seat, watching the road ahead of him with
intense abstraction, looking more gloomy and grizzled than usual.
"Enid is a vegetarian, you know," he remarked unexpectedly.

Claude smiled. "That could hardly make any difference to me, Mr.
Royce."

The other nodded slightly. "I know. At your age you think it
doesn't. Such things do make a difference, however." His lips
closed over his half-dead cigar, and for some time he did not
open them.

"Enid is a good girl," he said at last. "Strictly speaking, she
has more brains than a girl needs. If Mrs. Royce had another
daughter at home, I'd take Enid into my office. She has good
judgment. I don't know but she'd run a business better than a
house." Having got this out, Mr. Royce relaxed his frown, took
his cigar from his mouth, looked at it, and put it back between
his teeth without relighting it.

Claude was watching him with surprise. "There's no question about
Enid, Mr. Royce. I didn't come to ask you about her," he
exclaimed. "I came to ask if you'd be willing to have me for a
son-in-law. I know, and you know, that Enid could do a great deal
better than to marry me. I surely haven't made much of a showing,
so far."

"Here we are," announced Mr. Royce. "I'll leave the car under
this elm, and we'll go up to the north end of the field and have
a look."

They crawled under the wire fence and started across the rough
ground through a field of purple blossoms. Clouds of yellow
butterflies darted up before them. They walked jerkily, breaking
through the sun-baked crust into the soft soil beneath. Mr. Royce
lit a fresh cigar, and as he threw away the match let his hand
drop on the young man's shoulder. "I always envied your father.
You took my fancy when you were a little shaver, and I used to
let you in to see the water-wheel. When I gave up water power and
put in an engine, I said to myself: 'There's just one fellow in
the country will be sorry to see the old wheel go, and that's
Claude Wheeler.'"

"I hope you don't think I'm too young to marry," Claude said as
they tramped on.

"No, it's right and proper a young man should marry. I don't say
anything against marriage," Mr. Royce protested doggedly. "You
may find some opposition in Enid's missionary motives. I don't
know how she feels about that now. I don't enquire. I'd be
pleased to see her get rid of such notions. They don't do a woman
any good."

"I want to help her get rid of them. If it's all right with you,
I hope I can persuade Enid to marry me this fall."

Jason Royce turned his head quickly toward his companion, studied
his artless, hopeful countenance for a moment, and then looked
away with a frown.

The alfalfa field sloped upward at one corner, lay like a bright
green-and-purple handkerchief thrown down on the hillside. At the
uppermost angle grew a slender young cottonwood, with leaves as
light and agitated as the swarms of little butterflies that
hovered above the clover. Mr. Royce made for this tree, took off
his black coat, rolled it up, and sat down on it in the
flickering shade. His shirt showed big blotches of moisture, and
the sweat was rolling in clear drops along the creases in his
brown neck. He sat with his hands clasped over his knees, his
heels braced in the soft soil, and looked blankly off across the
field. He found himself absolutely unable to touch upon the vast
body of experience he wished to communicate to Claude. It lay in
his chest like a physical misery, and the desire to speak
struggled there. But he had no words, no way to make himself
understood. He had no argument to present. What he wanted to do
was to hold up life as he had found it, like a picture, to his
young friend; to warn him, without explanation, against certain
heart-breaking disappointments. It could not be done, he saw. The
dead might as well try to speak to the living as the old to the
young. The only way that Claude could ever come to share his
secret, was to live. His strong yellow teeth closed tighter and
tighter on the cigar, which had gone out like the first. He did
not look at Claude, but while he watched the wind plough soft,
flowery roads in the field, the boy's face was clearly before
him, with its expression of reticent pride melting into the
desire to please, and the slight stiffness of his shoulders, set
in a kind of stubborn loyalty. Claude lay on the sod beside him,
rather tired after his walk in the sun, a little melancholy,
though he did not know why.

After a long while Mr. Royce unclasped his broad, thick-fingered
miller's hands, and for a moment took out the macerated cigar.
"Well, Claude," he said with determined cheerfulness, "we'll
always be better friends than is common between father and
son-in-law. You'll find out that pretty nearly everything you
believe about life--about marriage, especially--is lies. I don't
know why people prefer to live in that sort of a world, but they
do."


VI

After his interview with Mr. Royce, Claude drove directly to the
mill house. As he came up the shady road, he saw with
disappointment the flash of two white dresses instead of one,
moving about in the sunny flower garden. The visitor was Gladys
Farmer. This was her vacation time. She had walked out to the
mill in the cool of the morning to spend the day with Enid. Now
they were starting off to gather water-cresses, and had stopped
in the garden to smell the heliotrope. On this scorching
afternoon the purple sprays gave out a fragrance that hung over
the flower-bed and brushed their cheeks like a warm breath. The
girls looked up at the same moment and recognized Claude. They
waved to him and hurried down to the gate to congratulate him on
his recovery. He took their little tin pails and followed them
around the old dam-head and up a sandy gorge, along a clear
thread of water that trickled into Lovely Creek just above the
mill. They came to the gravelly hill where the stream took its
source from a spring hollowed out under the exposed roots of two
elm trees. All about the spring, and in the sandy bed of the
shallow creek, the cresses grew cool and green.

Gladys had strong feelings about places. She looked around her
with satisfaction. "Of all the places where we used to play,
Enid, this was my favourite," she declared.

"You girls sit up there on the elm roots," Claude suggested.
"Wherever you put your foot in this soft gravel, water gathers.
You'll spoil your white shoes. I'll get the cress for you."

"Stuff my pail as full as you can, then," Gladys called as they
sat down. "I wonder why the Spanish dagger grows so thick on this
hill, Enid ? These plants were old and tough when we were little.
I love it here."

She leaned back upon the hot, glistening hill-side. The sun came
down in red rays through the elm-tops, and all the pebbles and
bits of quartz glittered dazzlingly. Down in the stream bed the
water, where it caught the light, twinkled like tarnished gold.
Claude's sandy head and stooping shoulders were mottled with
sunshine as they moved about over the green patches, and his duck
trousers looked much whiter than they were. Gladys was too poor
to travel, but she had the good fortune to be able to see a great
deal within a few miles of Frankfort, and a warm imagination
helped her to find life interesting. She did, as she confided to
Enid, want to go to Colorado; she was ashamed of never having
seen a mountain.

Presently Claude came up the bank with two shining, dripping
pails. "Now may I sit down with you for a few minutes ?"

Moving to make room for him beside her, Enid noticed that his
thin face was heavily beaded with perspiration. His pocket
handkerchief was wet and sandy, so she gave him her own, with a
proprietary air. "Why, Claude, you look quite tired! Have you
been over-doing ? Where were you before you came here ?"

"I was out in the country with your father, looking at his
alfalfa."

"And he walked you all over the field in the hot sun, I suppose ?"

Claude laughed. "He did."

"Well, I'll scold him tonight. You stay here and rest. I am going
to drive Gladys home."

Gladys protested, but at last consented that they should both
drive her home in Claude's car. They lingered awhile, however,
listening to the soft, amiable bubbling of the spring; a wise,
unobtrusive voice, murmuring night and day, continually telling
the truth to people who could not understand it.

When they went back to the house Enid stopped long enough to cut
a bunch of heliotrope for Mrs. Farmer,--though with the sinking
of the sun its rich perfume had already vanished. They left
Gladys and her flowers and cresses at the gate of the white
cottage, now half hidden by gaudy trumpet vines.

Claude turned his car and went back along the dim, twilight road
with Enid. "I usually like to see Gladys, but when I found her
with you this afternoon, I was terribly disappointed for a
minute. I'd just been talking with your father, and I wanted to
come straight to you. Do you think you could marry me, Enid ?"

"I don't believe it would be for the best, Claude." She spoke
sadly.

He took her passive hand. "Why not ?"

"My mind is full of other plans. Marriage is for most girls, but
not for all."

Enid had taken off her hat. In the low evening light Claude
studied her pale face under her brown hair. There was something
graceful and charming about the way she held her head, something
that suggested both submissiveness and great firmness. "I've had
those far-away dreams, too, Enid; but now my thoughts don't get
any further than you. If you could care ever so little for me to
start on, I'd be willing to risk the rest." She sighed. "You know
I care for you. I've never made any secret of it. But we're happy
as we are, aren't we ?"

"No, I'm not. I've got to have some life of my own, or I'll go to
pieces. If you won't have me, I'll try South America,--and I
won't come back until I am an old man and you are an old woman."

Enid looked at him, and they both smiled.

The mill house was black except for a light in one upstairs
window. Claude sprang out of his car and lifted Enid gently to
the ground. She let him kiss her soft cool mouth, and her long
lashes. In the pale, dusty dusk, lit only by a few white stars,
and with the chill of the creek already in the air, she seemed to
Claude like a shivering little ghost come up from the rushes
where the old mill-dam used to be. A terrible melancholy clutched
at the boy's heart. He hadn't thought it would be like this. He
drove home feeling weak and broken. Was there nothing in the
world outside to answer to his own feelings, and was every turn
to be fresh disappointment ? Why was life so mysteriously hard ?
This country itself was sad, he thought, looking about him,-and
you could no more change that than you could change the story in
an unhappy human face. He wished to God he were sick again; the
world was too rough a place to get about in.

There was one person in the world who felt sorry for Claude that
night. Gladys Farmer sat at her bedroom window for a long while,
watching the stars and thinking about what she had seen plainly
enough that afternoon. She had liked Enid ever since they were
little girls,--and knew all there was to know about her. Claude
would become one of those dead people that moved about the
streets of Frankfort; everything that was Claude would perish,
and the shell of him would come and go and eat and sleep for
fifty years. Gladys had taught the children of many such dead
men. She had worked out a misty philosophy for herself, full of
strong convictions and confused figures. She believed that all
things which might make the world beautiful--love and kindness,
leisure and art--were shut up in prison, and that successful men
like Bayliss Wheeler held the keys. The generous ones, who would
let these things out to make people happy, were somehow weak, and
could not break the bars. Even her own little life was squeezed
into an unnatural shape by the domination of people like Bayliss.
She had not dared, for instance, to go to Omaha that spring for
the three performances of the Chicago Opera Company. Such an
extravagance would have aroused a corrective spirit in all her
friends, and in the schoolboard as well; they would probably have
decided not to give her the little increase in salary she counted
upon having next year.

There were people, even in Frankfort, who had imagination and
generous impulses, but they were all, she had to admit,
inefficient--failures. There was Miss Livingstone, the fiery,
emotional old maid who couldn't tell the truth; old Mr. Smith, a
lawyer without clients, who read Shakespeare and Dryden all day
long in his dusty office; Bobbie Jones, the effeminate drug
clerk, who wrote free verse and "movie" scenarios, and tended the
sodawater fountain.

Claude was her one hope. Ever since they graduated from High
School, all through the four years she had been teaching, she had
waited to see him emerge and prove himself. She wanted him to be
more successful than Bayliss AND STILL BE CLAUDE. She would have
made any sacrifice to help him on. If a strong boy like Claude,
so well endowed and so fearless, must fail, simply because he had
that finer strain in his nature,--then life was not worth the
chagrin it held for a passionate heart like hers.

At last Gladys threw herself upon the bed. If he married Enid,
that would be the end. He would go about strong and heavy, like
Mr. Royce; a big machine with the springs broken inside.



VII

Claude was well enough to go into the fields before the harvest
was over. The middle of July came, and the farmers were still
cutting grain. The yield of wheat and oats was so heavy that
there were not machines enough to thrash it within the usual
time. Men had to await their turn, letting their grain stand in
shock until a belching black engine lumbered into the field.
Rains would have been disastrous; but this was one of those "good
years" which farmers tell about, when everything goes well. At
the time they needed rain, there was plenty of it; and now the
days were miracles of dry, glittering heat.

Every morning the sun came up a red ball, quickly drank the dew,
and started a quivering excitement in all living things. In great
harvest seasons like that one, the heat, the intense light, and
the important work in hand draw people together and make them
friendly. Neighbours helped each other to cope with the
burdensome abundance of man-nourishing grain; women and children
and old men fell to and did what they could to save and house it.
Even the horses had a more varied and sociable existence than
usual, going about from one farm to another to help neighbour
horses drag wagons and binders and headers. They nosed the colts
of old friends, ate out of strange mangers, and drank, or refused
to drink, out of strange water-troughs. Decrepit horses that
lived on a pension, like the Wheelers' stiff-legged Molly and
Leonard Dawson's Billy with the heaves--his asthmatic cough could
be heard for a quarter of a mile--were pressed into service now.
It was wonderful, too, how well these invalided beasts managed to
keep up with the strong young mares and geldings; they bent their
willing heads and pulled as if the chafing of the collar on their
necks was sweet to them.

The sun was like a great visiting presence that stimulated and
took its due from all animal energy. When it flung wide its cloak
and stepped down over the edge of the fields at evening, it left
behind it a spent and exhausted world. Horses and men and women
grew thin, seethed all day in their own sweat. After supper they
dropped over and slept anywhere at all, until the red dawn broke
clear in the east again, like the fanfare of trumpets, and nerves
and muscles began to quiver with the solar heat.

For several weeks Claude did not have time to read the
newspapers; they lay about the house in bundles, unopened, for
Nat Wheeler was in the field now, working like a giant. Almost
every evening Claude ran down to the mill to see Enid for a few
minutes; he did not get out of his car, and she sat on the old
stile, left over from horse-back days, while she chatted with
him. She said frankly that she didn't like men who had just come
out of the harvest field, and Claude did not blame her. He didn't
like himself very well after his clothes began to dry on him. But
the hour or two between supper and bed was the only time he had
to see anybody. He slept like the heroes of old; sank upon his
bed as the thing he desired most on earth, and for a blissful
moment felt the sweetness of sleep before it overpowered him. In
the morning, he seemed to hear the shriek of his alarm clock for
hours before he could come up from the deep places into which he
had plunged. All sorts of incongruous adventures happened to him
between the first buzz of the alarm and the moment when he was
enough awake to put out his hand and stop it. He dreamed, for
instance, that it was evening, and he had gone to see Enid as
usual. While she was coming down the path from the house, he
discovered that he had no clothes on at all! Then, with wonderful
agility, he jumped over the picket fence into a clump of castor
beans, and stood in the dusk, trying to cover himself with the
leaves, like Adam in the garden, talking commonplaces to Enid
through chattering teeth, afraid lest at any moment she might
discover his plight.

Mrs. Wheeler and Mahailey always lost weight in thrashing time,
just as the horses did; this year Nat Wheeler had six hundred
acres of winter wheat that would run close upon thirty bushels to
the acre. Such a harvest was as hard on the women as it was on
the men. Leonard Dawson's wife, Susie, came over to help Mrs.
Wheeler, but she was expecting a baby in the fall, and the heat
proved too much for her. Then one of the Yoeder daughters came;
but the methodical German girl was so distracted by Mahailey's
queer ways that Mrs. Wheeler said it was easier to do the work
herself than to keep explaining Mahailey's psychology. Day after
day ten ravenous men sat down at the long dinner table in the
kitchen. Mrs. Wheeler baked pies and cakes and bread loaves as
fast as the oven would hold them, and from morning till night the
range was stoked like the fire-box of a locomotive. Mahailey
wrung the necks of chickens until her wrist swelled up, as she
said, "like a puff-adder."

By the end of July the excitement quieted down. The extra leaves
were taken out of the dining table, the Wheeler horses had their
barn to themselves again, and the reign of terror in the henhouse
was over.

One evening Mr. Wheeler came down to supper with a bundle of
newspapers under his arm. "Claude, I see this war scare in Europe
has hit the market. Wheat's taken a jump. They're paying
eighty-eight cents in Chicago. We might as well get rid of a few
hundred bushel before it drops again. We'd better begin hauling
tomorrow. You and I can make two trips a day over to Vicount, by
changing teams,--there's no grade to speak of."

Mrs. Wheeler, arrested in the act of pouring coffee, sat holding
the coffee-pot in the air, forgetting she had it. "If this is
only a newspaper scare, as we think, I don't see why it should
affect the market," she murmured mildly. "Surely those big
bankers in New York and Boston have some way of knowing rumour
from fact."

"Give me some coffee, please," said her husband testily. "I don't
have to explain the market, I've only got to take advantage of
it."

"But unless there's some reason, why are we dragging our wheat
over to Vicount ? Do you suppose it's some scheme the grain men
are hiding under a war rumour ? Have the financiers and the press
ever deceived the public like this before ?"

"I don't know a thing in the world about it, Evangeline, and I
don't suppose. I telephoned the elevator at Vicount an hour ago,
and they said they'd pay me seventy cents, subject to change in
the morning quotations. Claude," with a twinkle in his eye,
"you'd better not go to mill tonight. Turn in early. If we are on
the road by six tomorrow, we'll be in town before the heat of the
day."

"All right, sir. I want to look at the papers after supper. I
haven't read anything but the headlines since before thrashing.
Ernest was stirred up about the murder of that Grand Duke and
said the Austrians would make trouble. But I never thought there
was anything in it."

"There's seventy cents a bushel in it, anyway," said his father,
reaching for a hot biscuit.

"If there's that much, I'm somehow afraid there will be more,"
said Mrs. Wheeler thoughtfully. She had picked up the paper
fly-brush and sat waving it irregularly, as if she were trying to
brush away a swarm of confusing ideas.

"You might call up Ernest, and ask him what the Bohemian papers
say about it," Mr. Wheeler suggested.

Claude went to the telephone, but was unable to get any answer
from the Havels. They had probably gone to a barn dance down in
the Bohemian township. He went upstairs and sat down before an
armchair full of newspapers; he could make nothing reasonable
out of the smeary telegrams in big type on the front page of the
Omaha World Herald. The German army was entering Luxembourg; he
didn't know where Luxembourg was, whether it was a city or a
country; he seemed to have some vague idea that it was a palace!
His mother had gone up to "Mahailey's library," the attic, to
hunt for a map of Europe,--a thing for which Nebraska farmers had
never had much need. But that night, on many prairie homesteads,
the women, American and foreign-born, were hunting for a map.

Claude was so sleepy that he did not wait for his mother's
return. He stumbled upstairs and undressed in the dark. The night
was sultry, with thunder clouds in the sky and an unceasing play
of sheet-lightning all along the western horizon. Mosquitoes had
got into his room during the day, and after he threw himself upon
the bed they began sailing over him with their high, excruciating
note. He turned from side to side and tried to muffle his ears
with the pillow. The disquieting sound became merged, in his
sleepy brain, with the big type on the front page of the paper;
those black letters seemed to be flying about his head with a
soft, high, sing-song whizz.



VIII

Late in the afternoon of the sixth of August, Claude and his
empty wagon were bumping along the level road over the flat
country between Vicount and the Lovely Creek valley. He had made
two trips to town that day. Though he had kept his heaviest team
for the hot afternoon pull, his horses were too tired to be urged
off a walk. Their necks were marbled with sweat stains, and their
flanks were plastered with the white dust that rose at every
step. Their heads hung down, and their breathing was deep and
slow. The wood of the green-painted wagon seat was blistering hot
to the touch. Claude sat at one end of it, his head bared to
catch the faint stir of air that sometimes dried his neck and
chin and saved him the trouble of pulling out a handkerchief. On
every side the wheat stubble stretched for miles and miles.
Lonely straw stacks stood up yellow in the sun and cast long
shadows. Claude peered anxiously along the distant locust hedges
which told where the road ran. Ernest Havel had promised to meet
him somewhere on the way home. He had not seen Ernest for a week:
since then Time had brought prodigies to birth.

At last he recognized the Havels' team along way off, and he
stopped and waited for Ernest beside a thorny hedge, looking
thoughtfully about him. The sun was already low. It hung above
the stubble, all milky and rosy with the heat, like the image of
a sun reflected in grey water. In the east the full moon had just
risen, and its thin silver surface was flushed with pink until it
looked exactly like the setting sun. Except for the place each
occupied in the heavens, Claude could not have told which was
which. They rested upon opposite rims of the world, two bright
shields, and regarded each other, as if they, too, had met by
appointment.

Claude and Ernest sprang to the ground at the same instant and
shook hands, feeling that they had not seen each other for a long
while.

"Well, what do you make of it, Ernest ?"

The young man shook his head cautiously, but replied no further.
He patted his horses and eased the collars on their necks.

"I waited in town for the Hastings paper," Claude went on
impatiently. "England declared war last night."

"The Germans," said Ernest, "are at Liege. I know where that is.
I sailed from Antwerp when I came over here."

"Yes, I saw that. Can the Belgians do anything ?"

"Nothing." Ernest leaned against the wagon wheel and drawing his
pipe from his pocket slowly filled it. "Nobody can do anything.
The German army will go where it pleases."

"If it's as bad as that, why are the Belgians putting up a fight ?"

"I don't know. It's fine, but it will come to nothing in the end.
Let me tell you something about the German army, Claude."

Pacing up and down beside the locust hedge, Ernest rehearsed the
great argument; preparation, organization, concentration,
inexhaustible resources, inexhaustible men. While he talked the
sun disappeared, the moon contracted, solidified, and slowly
climbed the pale sky. The fields were still glimmering with the
bland reflection left over from daylight, and the distance grew
shadowy,--not dark, but seemingly full of sleep.

"If I were at home," Ernest concluded, "I would be in the
Austrian army this minute. I guess all my cousins and nephews are
fighting the Russians or the Belgians already. How would you like
it yourself, to be marched into a peaceful country like this, in
the middle of harvest, and begin to destroy it ?"

"I wouldn't do it, of course. I'd desert and be shot."

"Then your family would be persecuted. Your brothers, maybe even
your father, would be made orderlies to Austrian officers and be
kicked in the mouth."

"I wouldn't bother about that. I'd let my male relatives decide
for themselves how often they would be kicked."

Ernest shrugged his shoulders. "You Americans brag like little
boys; you would and you wouldn't! I tell you, nobody's will has
anything to do with this. It is the harvest of all that has been
planted. I never thought it would come in my life-time, but I
knew it would come."

The boys lingered a little while, looking up at the soft radiance
of the sky. There was not a cloud anywhere, and the low glimmer
in the fields had imperceptibly changed to full, pure moonlight.
Presently the two wagons began to creep along the white road, and
on the backless seat of each the driver sat drooping forward,
lost in thought. When they reached the corner where Ernest turned
south, they said goodnight without raising their voices. Claude's
horses went on as if they were walking in their sleep. They did
not even sneeze at the low cloud of dust beaten up by their heavy
foot-falls,--the only sounds in the vast quiet of the night.

Why was Ernest so impatient with him, Claude wondered. He could
not pretend to feel as Ernest did. He had nothing behind him to
shape his opinions or colour his feelings about what was going on
in Europe; he could only sense it day by day. He had always been
taught that the German people were pre-eminent in the virtues
Americans most admire; a month ago he would have said they had
all the ideals a decent American boy would fight for. The
invasion of Belgium was contradictory to the German character as
he knew it in his friends and neighbours. He still cherished the
hope that there had been some great mistake; that this splendid
people would apologize and right itself with the world.

Mr. Wheeler came down the hill, bareheaded and coatless, as
Claude drove into the barnyard. "I expect you're tired. I'll put
your team away. Any news ?"

"England has declared war."

Mr. Wheeler stood still a moment and scratched his head. "I guess
you needn't get up early tomorrow. If this is to be a sure enough
war, wheat will go higher. I've thought it was a bluff until now.
You take the papers up to your mother."



IX

Enid and Mrs. Royce had gone away to the Michigan sanatorium
where they spent part of every summer, and would not be back
until October. Claude and his mother gave all their attention to
the war despatches. Day after day, through the first two weeks of
August, the bewildering news trickled from the little towns out
into the farming country.

About the middle of the month came the story of the fall of the
forts at Liege, battered at for nine days and finally reduced in a
few hours by siege guns brought up from the rear,--guns which
evidently could destroy any fortifications that ever had been, or
ever could be constructed. Even to these quiet wheat-growing
people, the siege guns before Liege were a menace; not to their
safety or their goods, but to their comfortable, established way
of thinking. They introduced the greater-than-man force which
afterward repeatedly brought into this war the effect of
unforeseeable natural disaster, like tidal waves, earthquakes, or
the eruption of volcanoes.

On the twenty-third came the news of the fall of the forts at
Namur; again giving warning that an unprecedented power of
destruction had broken loose in the world. A few days later the
story of the wiping out of the ancient and peaceful seat of
learning at Louvain made it clear that this force was being
directed toward incredible ends. By this time, too, the papers
were full of accounts of the destruction of civilian populations.
Something new, and certainly evil, was at work among mankind.
Nobody was ready with a name for it. None of the well-worn words
descriptive of human behaviour seemed adequate. The epithets
grouped about the name of "Attila" were too personal, too
dramatic, too full of old, familiar human passion.

One afternoon in the first week of September Mrs. Wheeler was in
the kitchen making cucumber pickles, when she heard Claude's car
coming back from Frankfort. In a moment he entered, letting the
screen door slam behind him, and threw a bundle of mail on the
table.

"What do you, think, Mother ? The French have moved the seat of
government to Bordeaux! Evidently, they don't think they can hold
Paris."

Mrs. Wheeler wiped her pale, perspiring face with the hem of her
apron and sat down in the nearest chair. "You mean that Paris is
not the capital of France any more ? Can that be true ?"

"That's what it looks like. Though the papers say it's only a
precautionary measure."

She rose. "Let's go up to the map. I don't remember exactly where
Bordeaux is. Mahailey, you won't let my vinegar burn, will you ?"

Claude followed her to the sitting-room, where her new map hung
on the wall above the carpet lounge. Leaning against the back of
a willow rocking-chair, she began to move her hand about over the
brightly coloured, shiny surface, murmuring, "Yes, there is
Bordeaux, so far to the south; and there is Paris."

Claude, behind her, looked over her shoulder. "Do you suppose
they are going to hand their city over to the Germans, like a
Christmas present ? I should think they'd burn it first, the way
the Russians did Moscow. They can do better than that now, they
can dynamite it!"

"Don't say such things." Mrs. Wheeler dropped into the deep
willow chair, realizing that she was very tired, now that she had
left the stove and the heat of the kitchen. She began weakly to
wave the palm leaf fan before her face. "It's said to be such a
beautiful city. Perhaps the Germans will spare it, as they did
Brussels. They must be sick of destruction by now. Get the
encyclopaedia and see what it says. I've left my glasses
downstairs."

Claude brought a volume from the bookcase and sat down on the
lounge. He began: "Paris, the capital city of France and the
Department of the Seine,--shall I skip the history ?"

"No. Read it all."

He cleared his throat and began again: "At its first appearance
in history, there was nothing to foreshadow the important part
which Paris was to play in Europe and in the world," etc.

Mrs. Wheeler rocked and fanned, forgetting the kitchen and the
cucumbers as if they had never been. Her tired body was resting,
and her mind, which was never tired, was occupied with the
account of early religious foundations under the Merovingian
kings. Her eyes were always agreeably employed when they rested
upon the sunburned neck and catapult shoulders of her red-headed
son.

Claude read faster and faster until he stopped with a gasp.

"Mother, there are pages of kings! We'll read that some other
time. I want to find out what it's like now, and whether it's
going to have any more history." He ran his finger up and down
the columns. "Here, this looks like business.

"Defences: Paris, in a recent German account of the greatest
fortresses of the world, possesses three distinct rings of
defences"--here he broke off. "Now what do you think of that ? A
German account, and this is an English book! The world simply
made a mistake about the Germans all along. It's as if we invited
a neighbour over here and showed him our cattle and barns, and
all the time he was planning how he would come at night and club
us in our beds."

Mrs. Wheeler passed her hand over her brow. "Yet we have had so
many German neighbours, and never one that wasn't kind and
helpful."

"I know it. Everything Mrs. Erlich ever told me about Germany
made me want to go there. And the people that sing all those
beautiful songs about women and children went into Belgian
villages and--"

"Don't, Claude!" his mother put out her hands as if to push his
words back. "Read about the defences of Paris; that's what we
must think about now. I can't but believe there is one fort the
Germans didn't put down in their book, and that it will stand. We
know Paris is a wicked city, but there must be many God-fearing
people there, and God has preserved it all these years. You saw
in the paper how the churches are full all day of women praying."
She leaned forward and smiled at him indulgently. "And you
believe those prayers will accomplish nothing, son ?"

Claude squirmed, as he always did when his mother touched upon
certain subjects. "Well, you see, I can't forget that the Germans
are praying, too. And I guess they are just naturally more pious
than the French." Taking up the book he began once more: "In the
low ground again, at the narrowest part of the great loop of the
Marne," etc.

Claude and his mother had grown familiar with the name of that
river, and with the idea of its strategic importance, before it
began to stand out in black headlines a few days later.

The fall ploughing had begun as usual. Mr. Wheeler had decided to
put in six hundred acres of wheat again. Whatever happened on the
other side of the world, they would need bread. He took a third
team himself and went into the field every morning to help Dan
and Claude. The neighbours said that nobody but the Kaiser had
ever been able to get Nat Wheeler down to regular work.

Since the men were all afield, Mrs. Wheeler now went every
morning to the mailbox at the crossroads, a quarter of a mile
away, to get yesterday's Omaha and Kansas City papers which the
carrier left. In her eagerness she opened and began to read them
as she turned homeward, and her feet, never too sure, took a
wandering way among sunflowers and buffaloburrs. One morning,
indeed, she sat down on a red grass bank beside the road and read
all the war news through before she stirred, while the
grasshoppers played leap-frog over her skirts, and the gophers
came out of their holes and blinked at her. That noon, when she
saw Claude leading his team to the water tank, she hurried down
to him without stopping to find her bonnet, and reached the
windmill breathless.

"The French have stopped falling back, Claude. They are standing
at the Marne. There is a great battle going on. The papers say it
may decide the war. It is so near Paris that some of the army
went out in taxi-cabs." Claude drew himself up. "Well, it will
decide about Paris, anyway, won't it ? How many divisions ?"

"I can't make out. The accounts are so confusing. But only a few
of the English are there, and the French are terribly
outnumbered. Your father got in before you, and he has the papers
upstairs."

"They are twenty-four hours old. I'll go to Vicount tonight after
I'm done work, and get the Hastings paper."

In the evening, when he came back from town, he found his father
and mother waiting up for him. He stopped a moment in the
sitting-room. "There is not much news, except that the battle is
on, and practically the whole French army is engaged. The Germans
outnumber them five to three in men, and nobody knows how much in
artillery. General Joffre says the French will fall back no
farther." He did not sit down, but went straight upstairs to his
room.

Mrs. Wheeler put out the lamp, undressed, and lay down, but not
to sleep. Long afterward, Claude heard her gently closing a
window, and he smiled to himself in the dark. His mother, he
knew, had always thought of Paris as the wickedest of cities, the
capital of a frivolous, wine-drinking, Catholic people, who were
responsible for the massacre of St. Bartholomew and for the
grinning atheist, Voltaire. For the last two weeks, ever since
the French began to fall back in Lorraine, he had noticed with
amusement her growing solicitude for Paris.

It was curious, he reflected, lying wide awake in the dark: four
days ago the seat of government had been moved to Bordeaux,--with
the effect that Paris seemed suddenly to have become the capital,
not of France, but of the world! He knew he was not the only
farmer boy who wished himself tonight beside the Marne. The fact
that the river had a pronounceable name, with a hard Western "r"
standing like a keystone in the middle of it, somehow gave one's
imagination a firmer hold on the situation. Lying still and
thinking fast, Claude felt that even he could clear the bar of
French "politeness"--so much more terrifying than German
bullets--and slip unnoticed into that outnumbered army. One's
manners wouldn't matter on the Marne tonight, the night of the
eighth of September, 1914. There was nothing on earth he would so
gladly be as an atom in that wall of flesh and blood that rose
and melted and rose again before the city which had meant so much
through all the centuries--but had never meant so much before.
Its name had come to have the purity of an abstract idea. In
great sleepy continents, in land-locked harvest towns, in the
little islands of the sea, for four days men watched that name as
they might stand out at night to watch a comet, or to see a star
fall.



X

It was Sunday afternoon and Claude had gone down to the mill
house, as Enid and her mother had returned from Michigan the day
before. Mrs. Wheeler, propped back in a rocking chair, was
reading, and Mr. Wheeler, in his shirt sleeves, his Sunday collar
unbuttoned, was sitting at his walnut secretary, amusing himself
with columns of figures. Presently he rose and yawned, stretching
his arms above his head.

"Claude thinks he wants to begin building right away, up on the
quarter next the timber claim. I've been figuring on the lumber.
Building materials are cheap just now, so I suppose I'd better
let him go ahead."

Mrs. Wheeler looked up absently from the page. "Why, I suppose
so."

Her husband sat down astride a chair, and leaning his arms on the
back of it, looked at her. "What do you think of this match,
anyway ? I don't know as I've heard you say."

"Enid is a good, Christian girl..." Mrs. Wheeler began
resolutely, but her sentence hung in the air like a question.

He moved impatiently. "Yes, I know. But what does a husky boy
like Claude want to pick out a girl like that for ? Why,
Evangeline, she'll be the old woman over again!"

Apparently these misgivings were not new to Mrs. Wheeler, for she
put out her hand to stop him and whispered in solemn agitation,
"Don't say anything! Don't breathe!"

"Oh, I won't interfere! I never do. I'd rather have her for a
daughter-in-law than a wife, by a long shot. Claude's more of a
fool than I thought him." He picked up his hat and strolled down
to the barn, but his wife did not recover her composure so
easily. She left the chair where she had hopefully settled
herself for comfort, took up a feather duster and began moving
distractedly about the room, brushing the surface of the
furniture. When the war news was bad, or when she felt troubled
about Claude, she set to cleaning house or overhauling the
closets, thankful to be able to put some little thing to rights
in such a disordered world.

As soon as the fall planting was done, Claude got the well borers
out from town to drill his new well, and while they were at work
he began digging his cellar. He was building his house on the
level stretch beside his father's timber claim because, when he
was a little boy, he had thought that grove of trees the most
beautiful spot in the world. It was a square of about thirty
acres, set out in ash and box-elder and cotton-woods, with a
thick mulberry hedge on the south side. The trees had been
neglected of late years, but if he lived up there he could manage
to trim them and care for them at odd moments.

Every morning now he ran up in the Ford and worked at his cellar.
He had heard that the deeper a cellar was, the better it was; and
he meant that this one should be deep enough. One day Leonard
Dawson stopped to see what progress he was making. Standing on
the edge of the hole, he shouted to the lad who was sweating
below.

"My God, Claude, what do you want of a cellar as deep as that ?
When your wife takes a notion to go to China, you can open a
trap-door and drop her through!"

Claude flung down his pick and ran up the ladder. "Enid's not
going to have notions of that sort," he said wrathfully.

"Well, you needn't get mad. I'm glad to hear it. I was sorry when
the other girl went. It always looked to me like Enid had her face
set for China, but I haven't seen her for a good while,--not
since before she went off to Michigan with the old lady."

After Leonard was gone, Claude returned to his work, still out of
humour. He was not altogether happy in his mind about Enid. When
he went down to the mill it was usually Mr. Royce, not Enid, who
sought to detain him, followed him down the path to the gate and
seemed sorry to see him go. He could not blame Enid with any lack
of interest in what he was doing. She talked and thought of
nothing but the new house, and most of her suggestions were good.
He often wished she would ask for something unreasonable and
extravagant. But she had no selfish whims, and even insisted that
the comfortable upstairs sleeping room he had planned with such
care should be reserved for a guest chamber.

As the house began to take shape, Enid came up often in her car,
to watch its growth, to show Claude samples of wallpapers and
draperies, or a design for a window-seat she had cut from some
magazine. There could be no question of her pride in every
detail. The disappointing thing was that she seemed more
interested in the house than in him. These months when they could
be together as much as they pleased, she treated merely as a
period of time in which they were building a house.

Everything would be all right when they were married, Claude told
himself. He believed in the transforming power of marriage, as
his mother believed in the miraculous effects of conversion.
Marriage reduced all women to a common denominator; changed a
cool, self-satisfied girl into a loving and generous one. It
was quite right that Enid should be unconscious now of everything
that she was to be when she was his wife. He told himself he
wouldn't want it otherwise.

But he was lonely, all the same. He lavished upon the little
house the solicitude and cherishing care that Enid seemed not to
need. He stood over the carpenters urging the greatest nicety in
the finish of closets and cupboards, the convenient placing of
shelves, the exact joining of sills and casings. Often he stayed
late in the evening, after the workmen with their noisy boots had
gone home to supper. He sat down on a rafter or on the skeleton
of the upper porch and quite lost himself in brooding, in
anticipation of things that seemed as far away as ever. The dying
light, the quiet stars coming out, were friendly and sympathetic.
One night a bird flew in and fluttered wildly about among the
partitions, shrieking with fright before it darted out into the
dusk through one of the upper windows and found its way to
freedom.

When the carpenters were ready to put in the staircase, Claude
telephoned Enid and asked her to come and show them just what
height she wanted the steps made. His mother had always had to
climb stairs that were too steep. Enid stopped her car at the
Frankfort High School at four o'clock and persuaded Gladys Farmer
to drive out with her.

When they arrived they found Claude working on the lattice
enclosure of the back porch. "Claude is like Jonah," Enid
laughed. "He wants to plant gourd vines here, so they will run
over the lattice and make shade. I can think of other vines that
might be more ornamental."

Claude put down his hammer and said coaxingly: "Have you ever
seen a gourd vine when it had something to climb on, Enid ? You
wouldn't believe how pretty they are; big green leaves, and
gourds and yellow blossoms hanging all over them at the same
time. An old German woman who keeps a lunch counter at one of
those stations on the road to Lincoln has them running up her
back porch, and I've wanted to plant some ever since I first saw
hers."

Enid smiled indulgently. "Well, I suppose you'll let me have
clematis for the front porch, anyway ? The men are getting ready
to leave, so we'd better see about the steps."

After the workmen had gone, Claude took the girls upstairs by the
ladder. They emerged from a little entry into a large room which
extended over both the front and back parlours. The carpenters
called it "the pool hall". There were two long windows, like
doors, opening upon the porch roof, and in the sloping ceiling
were two dormer windows, one looking north to the timber claim
and the other south toward Lovely Creek. Gladys at once felt a
singular pleasantness about this chamber, empty and unplastered
as it was. "What a lovely room!" she exclaimed.

Claude took her up eagerly. "Don't you think so ? You see it's my
idea to have the second floor for ourselves, instead of cutting
it up into little boxes as people usually do. We can come up here
and forget the farm and the kitchen and all our troubles. I've
made a big closet for each of us, and got everything just right.
And now Enid wants to keep this room for preachers!"

Enid laughed. "Not only for preachers, Claude. For Gladys, when
she comes to visit us--you see she likes it--and for your mother
when she comes to spend a week and rest. I don't think we ought
to take the best room for ourselves."

"Why not ?" Claude argued hotly. "I'm building the whole house for
ourselves. Come out on the porch roof, Gladys. Isn't this fine
for hot nights ? I want to put a railing round and make this into
a balcony, where we can have chairs and a hammock."

Gladys sat down on the low window-sill. "Enid, you'd be foolish
to keep this for a guest room. Nobody would ever enjoy it as much
as you would. You can see the whole country from here."

Enid smiled, but showed no sign of relenting. "Let's wait and
watch the sun go down. Be careful, Claude. It makes me nervous to
see you lying there."

He was stretched out on the edge of the roof, one leg hanging
over, and his head pillowed on his arm. The flat fields turned
red, the distant windmills flashed white, and little rosy clouds
appeared in the sky above them.

"If I make this into a balcony," Claude murmured, "the peak of
the roof will always throw a shadow over it in the afternoon, and
at night the stars will be right overhead. It will be a fine
place to sleep in harvest time."

"Oh, you could always come up here to sleep on a hot night," Enid
said quickly.

"It wouldn't be the same."

They sat watching the light die out of the sky, and Enid and
Gladys drew close together as the coolness of the autumn evening
came on. The three friends were thinking about the same thing;
and yet, if by some sorcery each had begun to speak his thoughts
aloud, amazement and bitterness would have fallen upon all.
Enid's reflections were the most blameless. The discussion about
the guest room had reminded her of Brother Weldon. In September,
on her way to Michigan with Mrs. Royce, she had stopped for a day
in Lincoln to take counsel with Arthur Weldon as to whether she
ought to marry one whom she described to him as "an unsaved man."
Young Mr. Weldon approached this subject with a cautious tread,
but when he learned that the man in question was Claude Wheeler,
he became more partisan than was his wont. He seemed to think
that her marrying Claude was the one way to reclaim him, and did
not hesitate to say that the most important service devout girls
could perform for the church was to bring promising young men to
its support. Enid had been almost certain that Mr. Weldon would
approve her course before she consulted him, but his concurrence
always gratified her pride. She told him that when she had a home
of her own she would expect him to spend a part of his summer
vacation there, and he blushingly expressed his willingness to do
so.

Gladys, too, was lost in her own thoughts, sitting with that ease
which made her seem rather indolent, her head resting against the
empty window frame, facing the setting sun. The rosy light made
her brown eyes gleam like old copper, and there was a moody look
in them, as if in her mind she were defying something. When he
happened to glance at her, it occurred to Claude that it was a
hard destiny to be the exceptional person in a community, to be
more gifted or more intelligent than the rest. For a girl it must
be doubly hard. He sat up suddenly and broke the long silence.

"I forgot, Enid, I have a secret to tell you. Over in the timber
claim the other day I started up a flock of quail. They must be
the only ones left in all this neighbourhood, and I doubt if they
ever come out of the timber. The bluegrass hasn't been mowed in
there for years,--not since I first went away to school, and maybe
they live on the grass seeds. In summer, of course, there are
mulberries."

Enid wondered whether the birds could have learned enough about
the world to stay hidden in the timber lot. Claude was sure they
had.

"Nobody ever goes near the place except Father; he stops there
sometimes. Maybe he has seen them and never said a word. It would
be just like him." He told them he had scattered shelled corn in
the grass, so that the birds would not be tempted to fly over
into Leonard Dawson's cornfield. "If Leonard saw them, he'd
likely take a shot at them."

"Why don't you ask him not to ?" Enid suggested.

Claude laughed. "That would be asking a good deal. When a bunch
of quail rise out of a cornfield they're a mighty tempting sight,
if a man likes hunting. We'll have a picnic for you when you come
out next summer, Gladys. There are some pretty places over there
in the timber."

Gladys started up. "Why, it's night already! It's lovely here,
but you must get me home, Enid."

They found it dark inside. Claude took Enid down the ladder and
out to her car, and then went back for Gladys. She was sitting on
the floor at the top of the ladder. Giving her his hand he helped
her to rise.

"So you like my little house," he said gratefully.

"Yes. Oh, yes!" Her voice was full of feeling, but she did not
exert herself to say more. Claude descended in front of her to
keep her from slipping. She hung back while he led her through
confusing doorways and helped her over the piles of laths that
littered the floors. At the edge of the gaping cellar entrance
she stopped and leaned wearily on his arm for a moment. She did
not speak, but he understood that his new house made her sad;
that she, too, had come to the place where she must turn out of
the old path. He longed to whisper to her and beg her not to
marry his brother. He lingered and hesitated, fumbling in the
dark. She had his own cursed kind of sensibility; she would
expect too much from life and be disappointed. He was reluctant
to lead her out into the chilly evening without some word of
entreaty. He would willingly have prolonged their passage,--
through many rooms and corridors. Perhaps, had that been
possible, the strength in him would have found what it was
seeking; even in this short interval it had stirred and made
itself felt, had uttered a confused appeal. Claude was greatly
surprised at himself.



XI

Enid decided that she would be married in the first week of June.
Early in May the plasterers and painters began to be busy in the
new house. The walls began to shine, and Claude went about all
day, oiling and polishing the hard-pine floors and wainscoting.
He hated to have anybody step on his floors. He planted gourd
vines about the back porch, set out clematis and lilac bushes,
and put in a kitchen garden. He and Enid were going to Denver and
Colorado Springs for their wedding trip, but Ralph would be at
home then, and he had promised to come over and water the flowers
and shrubs if the weather was dry.

Enid often brought her work and sat sewing on the front porch
while Claude was rubbing the woodwork inside the house, or
digging and planting outside. This was the best part of his
courtship. It seemed to him that he had never spent such happy
days before. If Enid did not come, he kept looking down the road
and listening, went from one thing to another and made no
progress. He felt full of energy, so long as she sat there on the
porch, with lace and ribbons and muslin in her lap. When he
passed by, going in or out, and stopped to be near her for a
moment, she seemed glad to have him tarry. She liked him to
admire her needlework, and did not hesitate to show him the
featherstitching and embroidery she was putting on her new
underclothes. He could see, from the glances they exchanged, that
the painters thought this very bold behaviour in one so soon to
be a bride. He thought it very charming behaviour himself, though
he would never have expected it of Enid. His heart beat hard when
he realized how far she confided in him, how little she was
afraid of him! She would let him linger there, standing over her
and looking down at her quick fingers, or sitting on the ground
at her feet, gazing at the muslin pinned to her knee, until his
own sense of propriety told him to get about his work and spare
the feelings of the painters.

"When are you going over to the timber claim with me ?" he asked,
dropping on the ground beside her one warm, windy afternoon. Enid
was sitting on the porch floor, her back against a pillar, and
her feet on one of those round mats of pursley that grow over
hard-beaten earth. "I've found my flock of quail again. They live
in the deep grass, over by a ditch that holds water most of the
year. I'm going to plant a few rows of peas in there, so they'll
have a feeding ground at home. I consider Leonard's cornfield a
great danger. I don't know whether to take him into my confidence
or not."

"You've told Ernest Havel, I suppose ?"

"Oh, yes!" Claude replied, trying not to be aware of the little
note of acrimony in her voice. "He's perfectly safe. That place
is a paradise for birds. The trees are full of nests. You can
stand over there in the morning and hear the young robins
squawking for their breakfast. Come up early tomorrow morning and
go over with me, won't you ? But wear heavy shoes; it's wet in the
long grass."

While they were talking a sudden whirlwind swept round the corner
of the house, caught up the little mound of folded lace
corset-covers and strewed them over the dusty yard. Claude ran
after them with Enid's flowered workbag and thrust them into it
as he came upon one after another, fluttering in the weeds. When
he returned, Enid had folded her needle-case and was putting on
her hat. "Thank you," she said with a smile. "Did you find
everything ?"

"I think so." He hurried toward the car to hide his guilty face.
One little lace thing he had not put into the bag, but had thrust
into his pocket.

The next morning Enid came up early to hear the birds in the
timber.



XII

On the night before his wedding Claude went to bed early. He had
been dashing about with Ralph all day in the car, making final
preparations, and was worn out. He fell asleep almost at once.
The women of the household could not so easily forget the great
event of tomorrow. After the supper dishes were washed, Mahailey
clambered up to the attic to get the quilt she had so long been
saving for a wedding present for Claude. She took it out
of the chest, unfolded it, and counted the stars in the
pattern--counting was an accomplishment she was proud of--before
she wrapped it up. It was to go down to the mill house with the
other presents tomorrow. Mrs. Wheeler went to bed many times that
night. She kept thinking of things that ought to be looked after;
getting up and going to make sure that Claude's heavy underwear
had been put into his trunk, against the chance of cold in the
mountains; or creeping downstairs to see that the six roasted
chickens which were to help out at the wedding supper were
securely covered from the cats. As she went about these tasks,
she prayed constantly. She had not prayed so long and fervently
since the battle of the Marne.

Early the next morning Ralph loaded the big car with the presents
and baskets of food and ran down to the Royces'. Two motors from
town were already standing in the mill yard; they had brought a
company of girls who came with all the June roses in Frankfort to
trim the house for the wedding. When Ralph tooted his horn,
half-a-dozen of them ran out to greet him, reproaching him
because he had not brought his brother along. Ralph was
immediately pressed into service. He carried the step-ladder
wherever he was told, drove nails, and wound thorny sprays of
rambler roses around the pillars between the front and back
parlours, making the arch under which the ceremony was to take
place.

Gladys Farmer had not been able to leave her classes at the High
School to help in this friendly work, but at eleven o'clock a
livery automobile drove up, laden with white and pink peonies
from her front yard, and bringing a box of hothouse flowers she
had ordered for Enid from Hastings. The girls admired them, but
declared that Gladys was extravagant, as usual; the flowers from
her own yard would really have been enough. The car was driven by
a lank, ragged boy who worked about the town garage, and who was
called "Silent Irv," because nobody could ever get a word out of
him. He had almost no voice at all,--a thin little squeak in the
top of his throat, like the gasping whisper of a medium in her
trance state. When he came to the front door, both arms full of
peonies, he managed to wheeze out:

"These are from Miss Farmer. There are some more down there."

The girls went back to his car with him, and he took out a square
box, tied up with white ribbons and little silver bells,
containing the bridal bouquet.

"How did you happen to get these ?" Ralph asked the thin boy. "I
was to go to town for them."

The messenger swallowed. "Miss Farmer told me if there were any
other flowers at the station marked for here, I should bring them
along."

"That was nice of her." Ralph thrust his hand into his trousers
pocket. "How much ? I'll settle with you before I forget."

A pink flush swept over the boy's pale face,--a delicate face
under ragged hair, contracted by a kind of shrinking unhappiness.
His eyes were always half-closed, as if he did not want to see
the world around him, or to be seen by it. He went about like
somebody in a dream. "Miss Farmer," he whispered, "has paid me."

"Well, she thinks of everything!" exclaimed one of the girls.
"You used to go to school to Gladys, didn't you, Irv ?"

"Yes, mam." He got into his car without opening the door,
slipping like an eel round the steering-rod, and drove off.

The girls followed Ralph up the gravel walk toward the house. One
whispered to the others: "Do you suppose Gladys will come out
tonight with Bayliss Wheeler ? I always thought she had a pretty
warm spot in her heart for Claude, myself."

Some one changed the subject. "I can't get over hearing Irv talk
so much. Gladys must have put a spell on him."

"She was always kind to him in school," said the girl who had
questioned the silent boy. "She said he was good in his studies,
but he was so frightened he could never recite. She let him write
out the answers at his desk."

Ralph stayed for lunch, playing about with the girls until his
mother telephoned for him. "Now I'll have to go home and look
after my brother, or he'll turn up tonight in a striped shirt."

"Give him our love," the girls called after him, "and tell him
not to be late."

As he drove toward the farm, Ralph met Dan, taking Claude's trunk
into town. He slowed his car. "Any message ?" he called.

Dan grinned. "Naw. I left him doin' as well as could be
expected."

Mrs. Wheeler met Ralph on the stairs. "He's up in his room. He
complains his new shoes are too tight. I think it's nervousness.
Perhaps he'll let you shave him; I'm sure he'll cut himself. And
I wish the barber hadn't cut his hair so short, Ralph. I hate
this new fashion of shearing men behind the ears. The back of his
neck is the ugliest part of a man." She spoke with such
resentment that Ralph broke into a laugh.

"Why, Mother, I thought all men looked alike to you! Anyhow,
Claude's no beauty."

"When will you want your bath ? I'll have to manage so that
everybody won't be calling for hot water at once." She turned to
Mr. Wheeler who sat writing a check at the secretary. "Father,
could you take your bath now, and be out of the way ?"

"Bath ?" Mr. Wheeler shouted, "I don't want any bath! I'm not
going to be married tonight. I guess we don't have to boil the
whole house for Enid."

Ralph snickered and shot upstairs. He found Claude sitting on the
bed, with one shoe off and one shoe on. A pile of socks lay
scattered on the rug. A suitcase stood open on one chair and a
black travelling bag on another.

"Are you sure they're too small ?" Ralph asked.

"About four sizes."

"Well, why didn't you get them big enough ?"

"I did. That shark in Hastings worked off another pair on me when
I wasn't looking. That's all right," snatching away the shoe his
brother had picked up to examine. "I don't care, so long as I can
stand in them. You'd better go telephone the depot and ask if
the train's on time."

"They won't know yet. It's seven hours till it's due."

"Then telephone later. But find out, somehow. I don't want to
stand around that station, waiting for the train."

Ralph whistled. Clearly, his young man was going to be hard to
manage. He proposed a bath as a soothing measure. No, Claude had
had his bath. Had he, then, packed his suitcase ?

"How the devil can I pack it when I don't know what I'm going to
put on ?"

"You'll put on one shirt and one pair of socks. I'm going to get
some of this stuff out of the way for you." Ralph caught up a
handful of socks and fell to sorting them. Several had bright red
spots on the toe. He began to laugh.

"I know why your shoe hurts, you've cut your foot!"

Claude sprang up as if a hornet had stung him. "Will you get out
of here," he shouted, "and let me alone ?"

Ralph vanished. He told his mother he would dress at once, as
they might have to use force with Claude at the last moment. The
wedding ceremony was to be at eight, supper was to follow, and
Claude and Enid were to leave Frankfort at 10:25, on the Denver
express. At six o'clock, when Ralph knocked at his brother's
door, he found him shaved and brushed, and dressed, except for
his coat. His tucked shirt was not rumpled, and his tie was
properly knotted. Whatever pain they concealed, his patent
leather shoes were smooth and glistening and resolutely pointed.

"Are you packed ?" Ralph asked in astonishment.

"Nearly. I wish you'd go over things and make them look a little
neater, if you can. I'd hate to have a girl see the inside of
that suitcase, the way it is. Where shall I put my cigars ?
They'll make everything smell, wherever I put them. All my
clothes seem to smell of cooking, or starch, or something. I
don't know what Mahailey does to them," he ended bitterly.

Ralph looked outraged. "Well, of all ingratitude! Mahailey's been
ironing your damned old shirts for a week!"

"Yes, yes, I know. Don't rattle me. I forgot to put any
handkerchiefs in my trunk, so you'll have to get the whole bunch
in somewhere."

Mr. Wheeler appeared in the doorway, his Sunday black trousers
gallowsed up high over a white shirt, wafting a rich odor of
bayrum from his tumbled hair. He held a thin folded paper
delicately between his thick fingers.

"Where is your bill-book, son ?"

Claude caught up his discarded trousers and extracted a square of
leather from the pocket. His father took it and placed the bit of
paper inside with the bank notes. "You may want to pick up some
trifle your wife fancies," he said. "Have you got your railroad
tickets in here ? Here is your trunk check Dan brought back. Don't
forget, I've put it in with your tickets and marked it C. W., so
you'll know which is your check and which is Enid's."

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir."

Claude had already drawn from the bank all the money he would
need. This additional bank check was Mr. Wheeler's admission that
he was sorry for some sarcastic remarks he had made a few days
ago, when he discovered that Claude had reserved a stateroom on
the Denver express. Claude had answered curtly that when Enid and
her mother went to Michigan they always had a stateroom, and he
wasn't going to ask her to travel less comfortably with him.

At seven o'clock the Wheeler family set out in the two cars that
stood waiting by the windmill. Mr. Wheeler drove the big
Cadillac, and Ralph took Mahailey and Dan in the Ford. When they
reached the mill house the outer yard was already black with
motors, and the porch and parlours were full of people talking
and moving about.

Claude went directly upstairs. Ralph began to seat the guests,
arranging the folding chairs in such a way as to leave a passage
from the foot of the stairs to the floral arch he had constructed
that morning. The preacher had his Bible in his hand and was
standing under the light, hunting for his chapter. Enid would
have preferred to have Mr. Weldon come down from Lincoln to marry
her, but that would have wounded Mr. Snowberry deeply. After all,
he was her minister, though he was not eloquent and persuasive
like Arthur Weldon. He had fewer English words at his command
than most human beings, and even those did not come to him
readily. In his pulpit he sought for them and struggled with them
until drops of perspiration rolled from his forehead and fell
upon his coarse, matted brown beard. But he believed what he
said, and language was so little an accomplishment with him that
he was not tempted to say more than he believed. He had been a
drummer boy in the Civil War, on the losing side, and he was a
simple, courageous man.

Ralph was to be both usher and best man. Gladys Farmer could not
be one of the bridesmaids because she was to play the wedding
march. At eight o'clock Enid and Claude came downstairs together,
conducted by Ralph and followed by four girls dressed in white,
like the bride. They took their places under the arch before the
preacher. He began with the chapter from Genesis about the
creation of man, and Adam's rib, reading in a laboured manner, as
if he did not quite know why he had selected that passage and was
looking for something he did not find. His nose-glasses kept
falling off and dropping upon the open book. Throughout this
prolonged fumbling Enid stood calm, looking at him respectfully,
very pretty in her short veil. Claude was so pale that he looked
unnatural,--nobody had ever seen him like that before. His face,
between his very black clothes and his smooth, sandy hair, was
white and severe, and he uttered his responses in a hollow voice.
Mahailey, at the back of the room, in a black hat with green
gooseberries on it, was standing, in order to miss nothing. She
watched Mr. Snowberry as if she hoped to catch some visible sign
of the miracle he was performing. She always wondered just what
it was the preacher did to make the wrongest thing in the world
the rightest thing in the world.

When it was over, Enid went upstairs to put on her travelling
dress, and Ralph and Gladys began seating the guests for supper.
Just twenty minutes later Enid came down and took her place
beside Claude at the head of the long table. The company rose and
drank the bride's health in grape-juice punch. Mr. Royce,
however, while the guests were being seated, had taken Mr.
Wheeler down to the fruit cellar, where the two old friends drank
off a glass of well-seasoned Kentucky whiskey, and shook hands.
When they came back to the table, looking younger than when they
withdrew, the preacher smelled the tang of spirits and felt
slighted. He looked disconsolately into his ruddy goblet and
thought about the marriage at Cana. He tried to apply his Bible
literally to life and, though he didn't dare breathe it aloud in
these days, he could never see why he was better than his Lord.

Ralph, as master of ceremonies, kept his head and forgot nothing.
When it was time to start, he tapped Claude on the shoulder,
cutting his father short in one of his best stories. Contrary to
custom, the bridal couple were to go to the station
unaccompanied, and they vanished from the head of the table with
only a nod and a smile to the guests. Ralph hurried them into the
light car, where he had already stowed Enid's hand luggage. Only
wizened little Mrs. Royce slipped out from the kitchen to bid
them good-bye.

That evening some bad boys had come out from town and strewn the
road near the mill with dozens of broken glass bottles, after
which they hid in the wild plum bushes to wait for the fun.
Ralph's was the first car out, and though his lights glittered on
this bed of jagged glass, there was no time to stop; the road was
ditched on either side, so he had to drive straight ahead, and
got into Frankfort on flat tires. The express whistled just as he
pulled up at the station. He and Claude caught up the four pieces
of hand luggage and put them in the stateroom. Leaving Enid there
with the bags, the two boys went to the rear platform of the
observation car to talk until the last moment. Ralph checked off
on his fingers the list of things he had promised Claude to
attend to. Claude thanked him feelingly. He felt that without
Ralph he could never have got married at all. They had never been
such good friends as during the last fortnight.

The wheels began to turn. Ralph gripped Claude's hand, ran to the
front of the car and stepped off. As Claude passed him, he stood
waving his handkerchief,--a rather funny figure under the station
lights, in his black clothes and his stiff straw hat, his short
legs well apart, wearing his incurably jaunty air.

The train glided quietly out through the summer darkness, along
the timbered river valley. Claude was alone on the back platform,
smoking a nervous cigar. As they passed the deep cut where Lovely
Creek flowed into the river, he saw the lights of the mill house
flash for a moment in the distance. The night air was still;
heavy with the smell of sweet clover that grew high along the
tracks, and of wild grapevines wet with dew. The conductor came
to ask for the tickets, saying with a wise smile that he had been
hunting for him, as he didn't like to trouble the lady.

After he was gone, Claude looked at his watch, threw away the end
of his cigar, and went back through the Pullman cars. The
passengers had gone to bed; the overhead lights were always
turned low when the train left Frankfort. He made his way through
the aisles of swaying green curtains, and tapped at the door of
his state room. It opened a little way, and Enid stood there in a
white silk dressing-gown with many ruffles, her hair in two
smooth braids over her shoulders.

"Claude," she said in a low voice, "would you mind getting a
berth somewhere out in the car tonight ? The porter says they are
not all taken. I'm not feeling very well. I think the dressing on
the chicken salad must have been too rich."

He answered mechanically. "Yes, certainly. Can't I get you
something ?"

"No, thank you. Sleep will do me more good than anything else.
Good-night."

She closed the door, and he heard the lock slip. He stood looking
at the highly polished wood of the panel for a moment, then
turned irresolutely and went back along the slightly swaying
aisle of green curtains. In the observation car he stretched
himself out upon two wicker chairs and lit another cigar. At
twelve o'clock the porter came in.

"This car is closed for the night, sah. Is you the gen'leman from
the stateroom in fourteen ? Do you want a lower ?"

"No, thank you. Is there a smoking car ?"

"They is the day-coach smokah, but it ain't likely very clean at
this time o' night."

"That's all right. It's forward ?" Claude absently handed him a
coin, and the porter conducted him to a very dirty car where the
floor was littered with newspapers and cigar stumps, and the
leather cushions were grey with dust. A few desperate looking men
lay about with their shoes off and their suspenders hanging down
their backs. The sight of them reminded Claude that his left foot
was very sore, and that his shoes must have been hurting him for
some time. He pulled them off, and thrust his feet, in their silk
socks, on the opposite seat.

On that long, dirty, uncomfortable ride Claude felt many things,
but the paramount feeling was homesickness. His hurt was of a
kind that made him turn with a sort of aching cowardice to the
old, familiar things that were as sure as the sunrise. If only
the sagebrush plain, over which the stars were shining, could
suddenly break up and resolve itself into the windings of Lovely
Creek, with his father's house on the hill, dark and silent in
the summer night! When he closed his eyes he could see the light
in his mother's window; and, lower down, the glow of Mahailey's
lamp, where she sat nodding and mending his old shirts. Human
love was a wonderful thing, he told himself, and it was most
wonderful where it had least to gain.

By morning the storm of anger, disappointment, and humiliation
that was boiling in him when he first sat down in the observation
car, had died out. One thing lingered; the peculiarly casual,
indifferent, uninterested tone of his wife's voice when she sent
him away. It was the flat tone in which people make commonplace
remarks about common things.

Day broke with silvery brightness on the summer sage. The sky
grew pink, the sand grew gold. The dawn-wind brought through the
windows the acrid smell of the sagebrush: an odour that is
peculiarly stimulating in the early morning, when it always seems
to promise freedom... large spaces, new beginnings, better
days.

The train was due in Denver at eight o'clock. Exactly at seven
thirty Claude knocked at Enid's door,--this time firmly. She was
dressed, and greeted him with a fresh, smiling face, holding her
hat in her hand.

"Are you feeling better ?" he asked.

"Oh, yes! I am perfectly all right this morning. I've put out all
your things for you, there on the seat."

He glanced at them. "Thank you. But I won't have time to change,
I'm afraid."

"Oh, won't you ? I'm so sorry I forgot to give you your bag last
night. But you must put on another necktie, at least. You look
too much like a groom."

"Do I ?" he asked, with a scarcely perceptible curl of his lip.

Everything he needed was neatly arranged on the plush seat;
shirt, collar, tie, brushes, even a handkerchief. Those in his
pockets were black from dusting off the cinders that blew in all
night, and he threw them down and took up the clean one. There
was a damp spot on it, and as he unfolded it he recognized the
scent of a cologne Enid often used. For some reason this
attention unmanned him. He felt the smart of tears in his eyes,
and to hide them bent over the metal basin and began to scrub his
face. Enid stood behind him, adjusting her hat in the mirror.

"How terribly smoky you are, Claude. I hope you don't smoke
before breakfast ?"

"No. I was in the smoking car awhile. I suppose my clothes got
full of it."

"You are covered with dust and cinders, too!" She took the
clothes broom from the rack and began to brush him.

Claude caught her hand. "Don't, please!" he said sharply. "The
porter can do that for me."

Enid watched him furtively as he closed and strapped his
suitcase. She had often heard that men were cross before
breakfast.

"Sure you've forgotten nothing ?" he asked before he closed her
bag.

"Yes. I never lose things on the train,--do you ?"

"Sometimes," he replied guardedly, not looking up as he snapped
the catch.




Book Three; Sunrise on the Prairie

I

Claude was to continue farming with his father, and after he
returned from his wedding journey, he fell at once to work. The
harvest was almost as abundant as that of the summer before, and
he was busy in the fields six days a week.

One afternoon in August he came home with his team, watered and
fed the horses in a leisurely way, and then entered his house by
the back door. Enid, he knew, would not be there. She had gone to
Frankfort to a meeting of the Anti-Saloon League. The Prohibition
party was bestirring itself in Nebraska that summer, confident of
voting the State dry the following year, which purpose it
triumphantly accomplished.

Enid's kitchen, full of the afternoon sun, glittered with new
paint, spotless linoleum, and blue-and-white cooking vessels. In
the dining-room the cloth was laid, and the table was neatly set
for one. Claude opened the icebox, where his supper was arranged
for him; a dish of canned salmon with a white sauce; hardboiled
eggs, peeled and lying in a nest of lettuce leaves; a bowl of
ripe tomatoes, a bit of cold rice pudding; cream and butter. He
placed these things on the table, cut some bread, and after
carelessly washing his face and hands, sat down to eat in his
working shirt. He propped the newspaper against a red glass water
pitcher and read the war news while he had his supper. He was
annoyed when he heard heavy footsteps coming around the house.
Leonard Dawson stuck his head in at the kitchen door, and Claude
rose quickly and reached for his hat; but Leonard came in,
uninvited, and sat down. His brown shirt was wet where his
suspenders gripped his shoulders, and his face, under a wide
straw hat which he did not remove, was unshaven and streaked with
dust.

"Go ahead and finish your supper," he cried. "Having a wife with
a car of her own is next thing to having no wife at all. How they
do like to roll around! I've been mighty blamed careful to see
that Susie never learned to drive a car. See here, Claude, how
soon do you figure you'll be able to let me have the thrasher ? My
wheat will begin to sprout in the shock pretty soon. Do you
reckon your father would be willing to work on Sunday, if I
helped you, to let the machine off a day earlier ?"

"I'm afraid not. Mother wouldn't like it. We never have done
that, even when we were crowded."

"Well, I think I'll go over and have a talk with your mother. If
she could look inside my wheat shocks, maybe I could convince her
it's pretty near a case of your neighbour's ox falling into a pit
on the Sabbath day."

"That's a good idea. She's always reasonable."

Leonard rose. "What's the news ?"

"The Germans have torpedoed an English passenger ship, the Arabic;
coming this way, too."

"That's all right," Leonard declared. "Maybe Americans will stay
at home now, and mind their own business. I don't care how they
chew each other up over there, not a bit! I'd as soon one got
wiped off the map as another."

"Your grandparents were English people, weren't they ?"

"That's a long while ago. Yes, my grandmother wore a cap and
little white curls, and I tell Susie I wouldn't mind if the baby
turned out to have my grandmother's skin. She had the finest
complexion I ever saw."

As they stepped out of the back door, a troop of white chickens
with red combs ran squawking toward them. It was the hour at
which the poultry was usually fed. Leonard stopped to admire
them. "You've got a fine lot of hens. I always did like white
leghorns. Where are all your roosters ?"

"We've only got one. He's shut up in the coop. The brood hens are
setting. Enid is going to try raising winter frys."

"Only one rooster ? And may I ask what these hens do ?"

Claude laughed. "They lay eggs, just the same,--better. It's the
fertile eggs that spoil in warm weather."

This information seemed to make Leonard angry. "I never heard of
such damned nonsense," he blustered. "I raise chickens on a
natural basis, or I don't raise 'em at all." He jumped into his
car for fear he would say more.

When he got home his wife was lifting supper, and the baby sat
near her in its buggy, playing with a rattle. Dirty and sweaty as
he was, Leonard picked up the clean baby and began to kiss it and
smell it, rubbing his stubbly chin in the soft creases of its
neck. The little girl was beside herself with delight.

"Go and wash up for supper, Len," Susie called from the stove. He
put down the baby and began splashing in the tin basin, talking
with his eyes shut.

"Susie, I'm in an awful temper. I can't stand that damned wife of
Claude's!"

She was spearing roasting ears out of a big iron pot and looked
up through the steam. "Why, have you seen her ? I was listening on
the telephone this morning and heard her tell Bayliss she would
be in town until late." "Oh, yes! She went to town all right, and
he's over there eating a cold supper by himself. That woman's a
fanatic. She ain't content with practising prohibition on
humankind; she's begun now on the hens." While he placed the
chairs and wheeled the baby up to the table, he explained Enid's
method of raising poultry to his wife. She said she really didn't
see any harm in it.

"Now be honest, Susie; did you ever know hens would keep on
laying without a rooster ?"

"No, I didn't, but I was brought up the old-fashioned way. Enid
has poultry books and garden books, and all such things. I don't
doubt she gets good ideas from them. But anyhow, you be careful.
She's our nearest neighbour, and I don't want to have trouble
with her."

"I'll have to keep out of her way, then. If she tries to do any
missionary work among my chickens, I'll tell her a few home
truths her husband's too bashful to tell her. It's my opinion
she's got that boy cowed already."

"Now, Len, you know she won't bother your chickens. You keep
quiet. But Claude does seem to sort of avoid people," Susie
admitted, filling her husband's plate again. "Mrs. Joe Havel says
Ernest don't go to Claude's any more. It seems Enid went over
there and wanted Ernest to paste some Prohibition posters about
fifteen million drunkards on their barn, for an example to the
Bohemians. Ernest wouldn't do it, and told her he was going to
vote for saloons, and Enid was quite spiteful, Mrs. Havel said.
It's too bad, when those boys were such chums. I used to like to
see them together." Susie spoke so kindly that her husband shot
her a quick glance of shy affection.

"Do you suppose Claude relished having that preacher visiting
them, when they hadn't been married two months ? Sitting on the
front porch in a white necktie every day, while Claude was out
cutting wheat ?"

"Well, anyhow, I guess Claude had more to eat when Brother Weldon
was staying there. Preachers won't be fed on calories, or
whatever it is Enid calls 'em," said Susie, who was given to
looking on the bright side of things. "Claude's wife keeps a
wonderful kitchen; but so could I, if I never cooked any more
than she does."

Leonard gave her a meaning look. "I don't believe you would live
with the sort of man you could feed out of a tin can."

"No, I don't believe I would." She pushed the buggy toward him.
"Take her up, Daddy. She wants to play with you."

Leonard set the baby on his shoulder and carried her off to show
her the pigs. Susie kept laughing to herself as she cleared the
table and washed the dishes; she was much amused by what her
husband had told her.

Late that evening, when Leonard was starting for the barn to see
that all was well before he went to bed, he observed a discreet
black object rolling along the highroad in the moonlight, a red
spark winking in the rear. He called Susie to the door.

"See, there she goes; going home to report the success of the
meeting to Claude. Wouldn't that be a nice way to have your wife
coming in ?"

"Now, Leonard, if Claude likes it--"

"Likes it ?" Big Leonard drew himself up. "What can he do, poor
kid ? He's stung!"



II

After Leonard left him, Claude cleared away the remains of his
supper and watered the gourd vine before he went to milk. It was
not really a gourd vine at all, but a summer-squash, of the
crook-necked, warty, orange-coloured variety, and it was now full
of ripe squashes, hanging by strong stems among the rough green
leaves and prickly tendrils. Claude had watched its rapid growth
and the opening of its splotchy yellow blossoms, feeling grateful
to a thing that did so lustily what it was put there to do. He
had the same feeling for his little Jersey cow, which came home
every night with full udders and gave down her milk willingly,
keeping her tail out of his face, as only a well disposed cow will
do.

His milking done, he sat down on the front porch and lit a cigar.
While he smoked, he did not think about anything but the quiet
and the slow cooling of the atmosphere, and how good it was to
sit still. The moon swam up over the bare wheat fields, big and
magical, like a great flower. Presently he got some bath towels,
went across the yard to the windmill, took off his clothes, and
stepped into the tin horse tank. The water had been warmed by the
sun all afternoon, and was not much cooler than his body. He
stretched himself out in it, and resting his head on the metal
rim, lay on his back, looking up at the moon. The sky was a
midnight-blue, like warm, deep, blue water, and the moon seemed
to lie on it like a water-lily, floating forward with an
invisible current. One expected to see its great petals open.

For some reason, Claude began to think about the far-off times
and countries it had shone upon. He never thought of the sun as
coming from distant lands, or as having taken part in human life
in other ages. To him, the sun rotated about the wheatfields. But
the moon, somehow, came out of the historic past, and made him
think of Egypt and the Pharaohs, Babylon and the hanging gardens.
She seemed particularly to have looked down upon the follies and
disappointments of men; into the slaves' quarters of old times,
into prison windows, and into fortresses where captives
languished.

Inside of living people, too, captives languished. Yes, inside of
people who walked and worked in the broad sun, there were
captives dwelling in darkness, never seen from birth to death.
Into those prisons the moon shone, and the prisoners crept to the
windows and looked out with mournful eyes at the white globe
which betrayed no secrets and comprehended all. Perhaps even in
people like Mrs. Royce and his brother Bayliss there was
something of this sort--but that was a shuddery thought. He
dismissed it with a quick movement of his hand through the water,
which, disturbed, caught the light and played black and gold,
like something alive, over his chest. In his own mother the
imprisoned spirit was almost more present to people than her
corporeal self. He had so often felt it when he sat with her on
summer nights like this. Mahailey, too, had one, though the walls
of her prison were so thick--and Gladys Farmer. Oh, yes, how much
Gladys must have to tell this perfect confidant! The people whose
hearts were set high needed such intercourse--whose wish was so
beautiful that there were no experiences in this world to satisfy
it. And these children of the moon, with their unappeased
longings and futile dreams, were a finer race than the children
of the sun. This conception flooded the boy's heart like a second
moonrise, flowed through him indefinite and strong, while he lay
deathly still for fear of losing it.

At last the black cubical object which had caught Leonard
Dawson's wrathful eye, came rolling along the highroad. Claude
snatched up his clothes and towels, and without waiting to make
use of either, he ran, a white man across a bare white yard.
Gaining the shelter of the house, he found his bathrobe, and fled
to the upper porch, where he lay down in the hammock. Presently
he heard his name called, pronounced as if it were spelled
"Clod." His wife came up the stairs and looked out at him. He lay
motionless, with his eyes closed. She went away. When all was
quiet again he looked off at the still country, and the moon in
the dark indigo sky. His revelation still possessed him, making
his whole body sensitive, like a tightly strung bow. In the
morning he had forgotten, or was ashamed of what had seemed so
true and so entirely his own the night before. He agreed, for the
most part, that it was better not to think about such things, and
when he could he avoided thinking.



III

After the heavy work of harvest was over, Mrs. Wheeler often
persuaded her husband, when he was starting off in his buckboard,
to take her as far as Claude's new house. She was glad Enid
didn't keep her parlour dark, as Mrs. Royce kept hers. The doors
and windows were always open, the vines and the long petunias in
the window-boxes waved in the breeze, and the rooms were full of
sunlight and in perfect order. Enid wore white dresses about her
work, and white shoes and stockings. She managed a house easily
and systematically. On Monday morning Claude turned the washing
machine before he went to work, and by nine o'clock the clothes
were on the line. Enid liked to iron, and Claude had never before
in his life worn so many clean shirts, or worn them with such
satisfaction. She told him he need not economize in working
shirts; it was as easy to iron six as three.

Although within a few months Enid's car travelled more than two
thousand miles for the Prohibition cause, it could not be said
that she neglected her house for reform. Whether she neglected
her husband depended upon one's conception of what was his due.
When Mrs. Wheeler saw how well their little establishment was
conducted, how cheerful and attractive Enid looked when one
happened to drop in there, she wondered that Claude was not
happy. And Claude himself wondered. If his marriage disappointed
him in some respects, he ought to be a man, he told himself, and
make the best of what was good in it. If his wife didn't love
him, it was because love meant one thing to him and quite another
thing to her. She was proud of him, was glad to see him when he
came in from the fields, and was solicitous for his comfort.
Everything about a man's embrace was distasteful to Enid;
something inflicted upon women, like the pain of childbirth,--
for Eve's transgression, perhaps.

This repugnance was more than physical; she disliked ardour of
any kind, even religious ardour. She had been fonder of Claude
before she married him than she was now; but she hoped for a
readjustment. Perhaps sometime she could like him again in
exactly the same way. Even Brother Weldon had hinted to her that
for the sake of their future tranquillity she must be lenient
with the boy. And she thought she had been lenient. She could not
understand his moods of desperate silence, the bitter, biting
remarks he sometimes dropped, his evident annoyance if she went
over to join him in the timber claim when he lay there idle in
the deep grass on a Sunday afternoon.

Claude used to lie there and watch the clouds, saying to himself,
"It's the end of everything for me." Other men than he must have
been disappointed, and he wondered how they bore it through a
lifetime. Claude had been a well behaved boy because he was an
idealist; he had looked forward to being wonderfully happy in
love, and to deserving his happiness. He had never dreamed that
it might be otherwise.

Sometimes now, when he went out into the fields on a bright
summer morning, it seemed to him that Nature not only smiled, but
broadly laughed at him. He suffered in his pride, but even more
in his ideals, in his vague sense of what was beautiful. Enid
could make his life hideous to him without ever knowing it. At
such times he hated himself for accepting at all her grudging
hospitality. He was wronging something in himself.

In her person Enid was still attractive to him. He wondered why
she had no shades of feeling to correspond to her natural grace
and lightness of movement, to the gentle, almost wistful
attitudes of body in which he sometimes surprised her. When he
came in from work and found her sitting on the porch, leaning
against a pillar, her hands clasped about her knees, her head
drooping a little, he could scarcely believe in the rigidity
which met him at every turn. Was there something repellent in
him ? Was it, after all, his fault ?

Enid was rather more indulgent with his father than with any one
else, he noticed. Mr. Wheeler stopped to see her almost every
day, and even took her driving in his old buckboard. Bayliss came
out from town to spend the evening occasionally. Enid's
vegetarian suppers suited him, and as she worked with him in the
Prohibition campaign, they always had business to discuss.
Bayliss had a social as well as a hygienic prejudice against
alcohol, and he hated it less for the harm it did than for the
pleasure it gave. Claude consistently refused to take any part in
the activities of the Anti-Saloon League, or to distribute what
Bayliss and Enid called "our literature."

In the farming towns the term "literature" was applied only to a
special kind of printed matter; there was Prohibition literature,
Sex-Hygiene literature, and, during a scourge of cattle disease,
there was Hoof-and-Mouth literature. This special application of
the word didn't bother Claude, but his mother, being an
old-fashioned school-teacher, complained about it.

Enid did not understand her husband's indifference to a burning
question, and could only attribute it to the influence of Ernest
Havel. She sometimes asked Claude to go with her to one of her
committee meetings. If it was a Sunday, he said he was tired and
wanted to read the paper. If it was a week-day, he had something
to do at the barn, or meant to clear out the timber claim. He
did, indeed, saw off a few dead limbs, and cut down a tree the
lightning had blasted. Further than that he wouldn't have let
anybody clear the timber lot; he would have died defending it.

The timber claim was his refuge. In the open, grassy spots, shut
in by the bushy walls of yellowing ash trees, he felt unmarried
and free; free to smoke as much as he liked, and to read and
dream. Some of his dreams would have frozen his young wife's
blood with horror--and some would have melted his mother's heart
with pity. To lie in the hot sun and look up at the stainless
blue of the autumn sky, to hear the dry rustle of the leaves as
they fell, and the sound of the bold squirrels leaping from
branch to branch; to lie thus and let his imagination play with
life--that was the best he could do. His thoughts, he told
himself, were his own. He was no longer a boy. He went off into
the timber claim to meet a young man more experienced and
interesting than himself, who had not tied himself up with
compromises.



IV

From her upstairs window Mrs. Wheeler could see Claude moving
back and forth in the west field, drilling wheat. She felt lonely
for him. He didn't come home as often as he might. She had begun
to wonder whether he was one of those people who are always
discontented; but whatever his disappointments were, he kept them
locked in his own breast. One had to learn the lessons of life.
Nevertheless, it made her a little sad to see him so settled and
indifferent at twenty-three.

After watching from the window for a few moments, she turned to
the telephone and called up Claude's house, asking Enid whether
she would mind if he came there for dinner. "Mahailey and I get
lonesome with Mr. Wheeler away so much," she added.

"Why, no, Mother Wheeler, of course not." Enid spoke cheerfully,
as she always did. "Have you any one there you can send over to
tell him ?"

"I thought I would walk over myself, Enid. It's not far, if I
take my time."

Mrs. Wheeler left the house a little before noon and stopped at
the creek to rest before she climbed the long hill. At the edge
of the field she sat down against a grassy bank and waited until
the horses came tramping up the long rows. Claude saw her and
pulled them in.

"Anything wrong, Mother ?" he called.

"Oh, no! I'm going to take you home for dinner with me, that's
all. I telephoned Enid." He unhooked his team, and he and his
mother started down the hill together, walking behind the horses.
Though they had not been alone like this for a long while, she
felt it best to talk about impersonal things.

"Don't let me forget to give you an article about the execution
of that English nurse."

"Edith Cavell ? I've read about it," he answered listlessly. "It's
nothing to be surprised at. If they could sink the Lusitania,
they could shoot an English nurse, certainly."

"Someway I feel as if this were different," his mother murmured.
"It's like the hanging of John Brown. I wonder they could find
soldiers to execute the sentence."

"Oh, I guess they have plenty of such soldiers!"

Mrs. Wheeler looked up at him. "I don't see how we can stay out
of it much longer, do you ? I suppose our army wouldn't be a drop
in the bucket, even if we could get it over. They tell us we can
be more useful in our agriculture and manufactories than we could
by going into the war. I only hope it isn't campaign talk. I do
distrust the Democrats."

Claude laughed. "Why, Mother, I guess there's no party politics
in this."

She shook her head. "I've never yet found a public question in
which there wasn't party politics. Well, we can only do our duty
as it comes to us, and have faith. This field finishes your fall
work ?"

"Yes. I'll have time to do some things about the place, now. I'm
going to make a good ice-house and put up my own ice this
winter."

"Were you thinking of going up to Lincoln, for a little ?"

"I guess not."

Mrs. Wheeler sighed. His tone meant that he had turned his back
on old pleasures and old friends.

"Have you and Enid taken tickets for the lecture course in
Frankfort ?"

"I think so, Mother," he answered a little impatiently. "I told
her she could attend to it when she was in town some day."

"Of course," his mother persevered, "some of the programs are not
very good, but we ought to patronize them and make the best of
what we have."

He knew, and his mother knew, that he was not very good at that.
His horses stopped at the water tank. "Don't wait for me. I'll be
along in a minute." Seeing her crestfallen face, he smiled.
"Never mind, Mother, I can always catch you when you try to give
me a pill in a raisin. One of us has to be pretty smart to fool
the other."

She blinked up at him with that smile in which her eyes almost
disappeared. "I thought I was smart that time!"

It was a comfort, she reflected, as she hurried up the hill, to
get hold of him again, to get his attention, even.

While Claude was washing for dinner, Mahailey came to him with a
page of newspaper cartoons, illustrating German brutality. To her
they were all photographs,--she knew no other way of making a
picture.

"Mr. Claude," she asked, "how comes it all them Germans is such
ugly lookin' people ? The Yoeders and the German folks round here
ain't ugly lookin'."

Claude put her off indulgently. "Maybe it's the ugly ones that
are doing the fighting, and the ones at home are nice, like our
neighbours."

"Then why don't they make their soldiers stay home, an' not go
breakin' other people's things, an' turnin' 'em out of their
houses," she muttered indignantly. "They say little babies was
born out in the snow last winter, an' no fires for their mudders
nor nothin'. 'Deed, Mr. Claude, it wasn't like that in our war;
the soldiers didn't do nothin' to the women an' chillun. Many a
time our house was full of Northern soldiers, an' they never so
much as broke a piece of my mudder's chiney."

"You'll have to tell me about it again sometime, Mahailey. I must
have my dinner and get back to work. If we don't get our wheat
in, those people over there won't have anything to eat, you
know."

The picture papers meant a great deal to Mahailey, because she
could faintly remember the Civil War. While she pored over
photographs of camps and battlefields and devastated villages,
things came back to her; the companies of dusty Union infantry
that used to stop to drink at her mother's cold mountain spring.
She had seen them take off their boots and wash their bleeding
feet in the run. Her mother had given one louse-bitten boy a
clean shirt, and she had never forgotten the sight of his back,
"as raw as beef where he'd scratched it." Five of her brothers
were in the Confederate army. When one was wounded in the second
battle of Bull Run, her mother had borrowed a wagon and horses,
gone a three days' journey to the field hospital, and brought the
boy home to the mountain. Mahailey could remember how her older
sisters took turns pouring cold spring water on his gangrenous
leg all day and all night. There were no doctors left in the
neighbourhood, and as nobody could amputate the boy's leg, he
died by inches. Mahailey was the only person in the Wheeler
household who had ever seen war with her own eyes, and she felt
that this fact gave her a definite superiority.



V

Claude had been married a year and a half. One December morning
he got a telephone message from his father-in-law, asking him to
come in to Frankfort at once. He found Mr. Royce sunk in his
desk-chair, smoking as usual, with several foreign-looking
letters on the table before him. As he took these out of their
envelopes and sorted the pages, Claude noticed how unsteady his
hands had become.

One letter, from the chief of the medical staff in the mission
school where Caroline Royce taught, informed Mr. Royce that his
daughter was seriously ill in the mission hospital. She would
have to be sent to a more salubrious part of the country for rest
and treatment, and would not be strong enough to return to her
duties for a year or more. If some member of her family could
come out to take care of her, it would relieve the school
authorities of great anxiety. There was also a letter from a
fellow teacher, and a rather incoherent one from Caroline
herself. After Claude finished reading them, Mr. Royce pushed a
box of cigars toward him and began to talk despondently about
missionaries.

"I could go to her," he complained, "but what good would that do ?
I'm not in sympathy with her ideas, and it would only fret her.
You can see she's made her mind up not to come home. I don't
believe in one people trying to force their ways or their
religion on another. I'm not that kind of man." He sat looking at
his cigar. After a long pause he broke out suddenly, "China has
been drummed into my ears. It seems like a long way to go to
hunt for trouble, don't it ? A man hasn't got much control over
his own life, Claude. If it ain't poverty or disease that
torments him, it's a name on the map. I could have made out
pretty well, if it hadn't been for China, and some other things....
If Carrie'd had to teach for her clothes and help pay off
my notes, like old man Harrison's daughters, like enough she'd
have stayed at home. There's always something. I don't know what
to say about showing these letters to Enid."

"Oh, she will have to know about it, Mr. Royce. If she feels that
she ought to go to Carrie, it wouldn't be right for me to
interfere."

Mr. Royce shook his head. "I don't know. It don't seem fair that
China should hang over you, too."

When Claude got home he remarked as he handed Enid the letters,
"Your father has been a good deal upset by this. I never saw him
look so old as he did today."

Enid studied their contents, sitting at her orderly little desk,
while Claude pretended to read the paper.

"It seems clear that I am the one to go," she said when she had
finished.

"You think it's necessary for some one to go ? I don't see it."

"It would look very strange if none of us went," Enid replied
with spirit.

"How, look strange ?"

"Why, it would look to her associates as if her family had no
feeling."

"Oh, if that's all!" Claude smiled perversely and took up his
paper again. "I wonder how it will look to people here if you go
off and leave your husband ?"

"What a mean thing to say, Claude!" She rose sharply, then
hesitated, perplexed. "People here know me better than that. It
isn't as if you couldn't be perfectly comfortable at your
mother's." As he did not glance up from his paper, she went into
the kitchen.

Claude sat still, listening to Enid's quick movements as she
opened up the range to get supper. The light in the room grew
greyer. Outside the fields melted into one another as evening
came on. The young trees in the yard bent and whipped about under
a bitter north wind. He had often thought with pride that winter
died at his front doorstep; within, no draughty halls, no chilly
corners. This was their second year here. When he was driving
home, the thought that he might be free of this house for a long
while had stirred a pleasant excitement in him; but now, he
didn't want to leave it. Something grew soft in him. He wondered
whether they couldn't try again, and make things go better. Enid
was singing in the kitchen in a subdued, rather lonely voice. He
rose and went out for his milking coat and pail. As he passed his
wife by the window, he stopped and put his arm about her
questioningly.

She looked up. "That's right. You're feeling better about it,
aren't you ? I thought you would. Gracious, what a smelly coat,
Claude! I must find another for you."

Claude knew that tone. Enid never questioned the rightness of her
own decisions. When she made up her mind, there was no turning
her. He went down the path to the barn with his hands stuffed in
his trousers pockets, his bright pail hanging on his arm. Try
again--what was there to try ? Platitudes, littleness, falseness....
His life was choking him, and he hadn't the courage to
break with it. Let her go! Let her go when she would!... What
a hideous world to be born into! Or was it hideous only for him ?
Everything he touched went wrong under his hand--always had.

When they sat down at the supper table in the back parlour an
hour later, Enid looked worn, as if this time her decision had
cost her something. "I should think you might have a restful
winter at your mother's," she began cheerfully. "You won't have
nearly so much to look after as you do here. We needn't disturb
things in this house. I will take the silver down to Mother, and
we can leave everything else just as it is. Would there be room
for my car in your father's garage ? You might find it a
convenience."

"Oh, no! I won't need it. I'll put it up at the mill house," he
answered with an effort at carelessness.

All the familiar objects that stood about them in the lamplight
seemed stiller and more solemn than usual, as if they were
holding their breath.

"I suppose you had better take the chickens over to your
mother's," Enid continued evenly. "But I shouldn't like them to
get mixed with her Plymouth Rocks; there's not a dark feather
among them now. Do ask Mother Wheeler to use all the eggs, and
not to let my hens set in the spring."

"In the spring ?" Claude looked up from his plate.

"Of course, Claude. I could hardly get back before next fall, if
I'm to be of any help to poor Carrie. I might try to be home for
harvest, if that would make it more convenient for you." She rose
to bring in the dessert.

"Oh, don't hurry on my account!" he muttered, staring after her
disappearing figure.

Enid came back with the hot pudding and the after-dinner coffee
things. "This has come on us so suddenly that we must make our
plans at once," she explained. "I should think your mother would
be glad to keep Rose for us; she is such a good cow. And then you
can have all the cream you want."

He took the little gold-rimmed cup she held out to him. "If you
are going to be gone until next fall, I shall sell Rose," he
announced gruffly.

"But why ? You might look a long time before you found another
like her."

"I shall sell her, anyhow. The horses, of course, are Father's;
he paid for them. If you clear out, he may want to rent this
place. You may find a tenant in here when you get back from
China." Claude swallowed his coffee, put down the cup, and went
into the front parlour, where he lit a cigar. He walked up and
down, keeping his eyes fixed upon his wife, who still sat at the
table in the circle of light from the hanging lamp. Her head,
bent forward a little, showed the neat part of her brown hair.
When she was perplexed, her face always looked sharper, her chin
longer.

"If you've no feeling for the place," said Claude from the other
room, "you can hardly expect me to hang around and take care of
it. All the time you were campaigning, I played housekeeper
here."

Enid's eyes narrowed, but she did not flush. Claude had never
seen a wave of colour come over his wife's pale, smooth cheeks.

"Don't be childish. You know I care for this place; it's our
home. But no feeling would be right that kept me from doing my
duty. You are well, and you have your mother's house to go to.
Carrie is ill and among strangers."

She began to gather up the dishes. Claude stepped quickly out
into the light and confronted her. "It's not only your going. You
know what's the matter with me. It's because you want to go. You
are glad of a chance to get away among all those preachers, with
their smooth talk and make-believe."

Enid took up the tray. "If I am glad, it's because you are not
willing to govern our lives by Christian ideals. There is
something in you that rebels all the time. So many important
questions have come up since our marriage, and you have been
indifferent or sarcastic about every one of them. You want to
lead a purely selfish life."

She walked resolutely out of the room and shut the door behind
her. Later, when she came back, Claude was not there. His hat and
coat were gone from the hat rack; he must have let himself out
quietly by the front door. Enid sat up until eleven and then went
to bed.

In the morning, on coming out from her bedroom, she found Claude
asleep on the lounge, dressed, with his overcoat on. She had a
moment of terror and bent over him, but she could not detect any
smell of spirits. She began preparations for breakfast, moving
quietly.

Having once made up her mind to go out to her sister, Enid lost
no time. She engaged passage and cabled the mission school. She
left Frankfort the week before Christmas. Claude and Ralph took
her as far as Denver and put her on a trans-continental express.
When Claude came home, he moved over to his mother's, and sold
his cow and chickens to Leonard Dawson. Except when he went to
see Mr. Royce, he seldom left the farm now, and he avoided the
neighbours. He felt that they were discussing his domestic
affairs,--as, of course, they were. The Royces and the Wheelers,
they said, couldn't behave like anybody else, and it was no use
their trying. If Claude built the best house in the
neighbourhood, he just naturally wouldn't live in it. And if he
had a wife at all, it was like him to have a wife in China!

One snowy day, when nobody was about, Claude took the big car and
went over to his own place to close the house for the winter and
bring away the canned fruit and vegetables left in the cellar.
Enid had packed her best linen in her cedar chest and had put the
kitchen and china closets in scrupulous order before she went
away. He began covering the upholstered chairs and the mattresses
with sheets, rolled up the rugs, and fastened the windows
securely. As he worked, his hands grew more and more numb and
listless, and his heart was like a lump of ice. All these things
that he had selected with care and in which he had taken such
pride, were no more to him now than the lumber piled in the shop
of any second-hand dealer.

How inherently mournful and ugly such objects were, when the
feeling that had made them precious no longer existed! The debris
of human life was more worthless and ugly than the dead and
decaying things in nature. Rubbish... junk... his mind
could not picture anything that so exposed and condemned all the
dreary, weary, ever-repeated actions by which life is continued
from day to day. Actions without meaning.... As he looked out
and saw the grey landscape through the gently falling snow, he
could not help thinking how much better it would be if people
could go to sleep like the fields; could be blanketed down under
the snow, to wake with their hurts healed and their defeats
forgotten. He wondered how he was to go on through the years
ahead of him, unless he could get rid of this sick feeling in his
soul.

At last he locked the door, put the key in his pocket, and went
over to the timber claim to smoke a cigar and say goodbye to the
place. There he soberly walked about for more than an hour, under
the crooked trees with empty birds' nests in their forks. Every
time he came to a break in the hedge, he could see the little
house, giving itself up so meekly to solitude. He did not believe
that he would ever live there again. Well, at any rate, the money
his father had put into the place would not be lost; he could
always get a better tenant for having a comfortable house there.
Several of the boys in the neighbourhood were planning to be
married within the year. The future of the house was safe. And
he ? He stopped short in his walk; his feet had made an uncertain,
purposeless trail all over the white ground. It vexed him to see
his own footsteps. What was it--what WAS the matter with him ?
Why, at least, could he not stop feeling things, and hoping ? What
was there to hope for now ?

He heard a sound of distress, and looking back, saw the barn cat,
that had been left behind to pick up her living. She was standing
inside the hedge, her jet black fur ruffled against the wet
flakes, one paw lifted, mewing miserably. Claude went over and
picked her up.

"What's the matter, Blackie ? Mice getting scarce in the barn ?
Mahailey will say you are bad luck. Maybe you are, but you can't
help it, can you ?" He slipped her into his overcoat pocket.
Later, when he was getting into his car, he tried to dislodge her
and put her in a basket, but she clung to her nest in his pocket
and dug her claws into the lining. He laughed. "Well, if you are
bad luck, I guess you are going to stay right with me!"

She looked up at him with startled yellow eyes and did not even
mew.



VI

Mrs. Wheeler was afraid that Claude might not find the old place
comfortable, after having had a house of his own. She put her
best rocking chair and a reading lamp in his bedroom. He often
sat there all evening, shading his eyes with his hand, pretending
to read. When he stayed downstairs after supper, his mother and
Mahailey were grateful. Besides collecting war pictures,
Mahailey now hunted through the old magazines in the attic for
pictures of China. She had marked on her big kitchen calendar the
day when Enid would arrive in Hong-Kong.

"Mr. Claude," she would say as she stood at the sink washing the
supper dishes, "it's broad daylight over where Miss Enid is,
ain't it ? Cause the world's round, an' the old sun, he's
a-shinin' over there for the yaller people."

From time to time, when they were working together, Mrs. Wheeler
told Mahailey what she knew about the customs of the Chinese. The
old woman had never had two impersonal interests at the same time
before, and she scarcely knew what to do with them. She would
murmur on, half to Claude and half to herself: "They ain't
fightin' over there where Miss Enid is, is they ? An' she won't
have to wear their kind of clothes, cause she's a white woman.
She won't let 'em kill their girl babies nor do such awful things
like they always have, an' she won't let 'em pray to them stone
iboles, cause they can't help 'em none. I 'spect Miss Enid'll do
a heap of good, all the time."

Behind her diplomatic monologues, however, Mahailey had her own
ideas, and she was greatly scandalized at Enid's departure. She
was afraid people would say that Claude's wife had "run off an'
lef' him," and in the Virginia mountains, where her social
standards had been formed, a husband or wife thus deserted was
the object of boisterous ridicule. She once stopped Mrs. Wheeler
in a dark corner of the cellar to whisper, "Mr. Claude's wife
ain't goin' to stay off there, like her sister, is she ?"

If one of the Yoeder boys or Susie Dawson happened to be at the
Wheelers' for dinner, Mahailey never failed to refer to Enid in a
loud voice. "Mr. Claude's wife, she cuts her potatoes up raw in
the pan an' fries 'em. She don't boil 'em first like I do. I know
she's an awful good cook, I know she is." She felt that easy
references to the absent wife made things look better.

Ernest Havel came to see Claude now, but not often. They both
felt it would be indelicate to renew their former intimacy.
Ernest still felt aggrieved about his beer, as if Enid had
snatched the tankard from his lips with her own corrective hand.
Like Leonard, he believed that Claude had made a bad bargain in
matrimony; but instead of feeling sorry for him, Ernest wanted to
see him convinced and punished. When he married Enid, Claude had
been false to liberal principles, and it was only right that he
should pay for his apostasy. The very first time he came to spend
an evening at the Wheelers' after Claude came home to live,
Ernest undertook to explain his objections to Prohibition. Claude
shrugged his shoulders.

"Why not drop it ? It's a matter that doesn't interest me, one way
or the other."

Ernest was offended and did not come back for nearly a
month--not, indeed, until the announcement that Germany would
resume unrestricted submarine warfare made every one look
questioningly at his neighbour.

He walked into the Wheelers' kitchen the night after this news
reached the farming country, and found Claude and his mother
sitting at the table, reading the papers aloud to each other in
snatches. Ernest had scarcely taken a seat when the telephone
bell rang. Claude answered the call.

"It's the telegraph operator at Frankfort," he said, as he hung
up the receiver. "He repeated a message from Father, sent from
Wray: 'Will be home day after tomorrow. Read the papers.' What
does he mean ? What does he suppose we are doing ?"

"It means he considers our situation very serious. It's not like
him to telegraph except in case of illness." Mrs. Wheeler rose
and walked distractedly to the telephone box, as if it might
further disclose her husband's state of mind.

"But what a queer message! It was addressed to you, too, Mother,
not to me."

"He would know how I feel about it. Some of your father's people
were seagoing men, out of Portsmouth. He knows what it means when
our shipping is told where it can go on the ocean, and where it
cannot. It isn't possible that Washington can take such an
affront for us. To think that at this time, of all times, we
should have a Democratic administration!"

Claude laughed. "Sit down, Mother. Wait a day or two. Give them
time."

"The war will be over before Washington can do anything, Mrs.
Wheeler," Ernest declared gloomily, "England will be starved out,
and France will be beaten to a standstill. The whole German army
will be on the Western front now. What could this country do ? How
long do you suppose it takes to make an army ?"

Mrs. Wheeler stopped short in her restless pacing and met his
moody glance. "I don't know anything, Ernest, but I believe the
Bible. I believe that in the twinkling of an eye we shall be
changed!"

Ernest looked at the floor. He respected faith. As he said, you
must respect it or despise it, for there was nothing else to do.

Claude sat leaning his elbows on the table. "It always comes back
to the same thing, Mother. Even if a raw army could do anything,
how would we get it over there ? Here's one naval authority who
says the Germans are turning out submarines at the rate of three
a day. They probably didn't spring this on us until they had
enough built to keep the ocean clear."

"I don't pretend to say what we could accomplish, son. But we
must stand somewhere, morally. They have told us all along that
we could be more helpful to the Allies out of the war than in it,
because we could send munitions and supplies. If we agree to
withdraw that aid, where are we ? Helping Germany, all the time we
are pretending to mind our own business! If our only alternative
is to be at the bottom of the sea, we had better be there!"

"Mother, do sit down! We can't settle it tonight. I never saw you
so worked up."

"Your father is worked up, too, or he would never have sent that
telegram." Mrs. Wheeler reluctantly took up her workbasket, and
the boys talked with their old, easy friendliness.

When Ernest left, Claude walked as far as the Yoeders' place with
him, and came back across the snow-drifted fields, under the
frosty brilliance of the winter stars. As he looked up at them,
he felt more than ever that they must have something to do with
the fate of nations, and with the incomprehensible things that
were happening in the world. In the ordered universe there must
be some mind that read the riddle of this one unhappy planet,
that knew what was forming in the dark eclipse of this hour. A
question hung in the air; over all this quiet land about him,
over him, over his mother, even. He was afraid for his country,
as he had been that night on the State House steps in Denver,
when this war was undreamed of, hidden in the womb of time.

Claude and his mother had not long to wait. Three days later they
knew that the German ambassador had been dismissed, and the
American ambassador recalled from Berlin. To older men these
events were subjects to think and converse about; but to boys
like Claude they were life and death, predestination.



VII

One stormy morning Claude was driving the big wagon to town to
get a load of lumber. The roads were beginning to thaw out, and
the country was black and dirty looking. Here and there on the
dark mud, grey snow crusts lingered, perforated like honeycomb,
with wet weedstalks sticking up through them. As the wagon
creaked over the high ground just above Frankfort, Claude noticed
a brilliant new flag flying from the schoolhouse cupola. He had
never seen the flag before when it meant anything but the Fourth
of July, or a political rally. Today it was as if he saw it for
the first time; no bands, no noise, no orators; a spot of
restless colour against the sodden March sky.

He turned out of his way in order to pass the High School, drew
up his team, and waited a few minutes until the noon bell rang.
The older boys and girls came out first, with a flurry of
raincoats and umbrellas. Presently he saw Gladys Farmer, in a
yellow "slicker" and an oilskin hat, and waved to her. She came
up to the wagon.

"I like your decoration," he said, glancing toward the cupola.

"It's a silk one the Senior boys bought with their athletic
money. I advised them not to run it up in this rain, but the
class president told me they bought that flag for storms."

"Get in, and I'll take you home."

She took his extended hand, put her foot on the hub of the wheel,
and climbed to the seat beside him. He clucked to his team.

"So your High School boys are feeling war-like these days ?"

"Very. What do you think ?"

"I think they'll have a chance to express their feelings."

"Do you, Claude ? It seems awfully unreal."

"Nothing else seems very real, either. I'm going to haul out a
load of lumber, but I never expect to drive a nail in it. These
things don't matter now. There is only one thing we ought to do,
and only one thing that matters; we all know it."

"You feel it's coming nearer every day ?"

"Every day."

Gladys made no reply. She only looked at him gravely with her
calm, generous brown eyes. They stopped before the low house
where the windows were full of flowers. She took his hand and
swung herself to the ground, holding it for a moment while she
said good-bye. Claude drove back to the lumber yard. In a place
like Frankfort, a boy whose wife was in China could hardly go to
see Gladys without causing gossip.



VIII

During the bleak month of March Mr. Wheeler went to town in his
buckboard almost every day. For the first time in his life he had
a secret anxiety. The one member of his family who had never
given him the slightest trouble, his son Bayliss, was just now
under a cloud.

Bayliss was a Pacifist, and kept telling people that if only the
United States would stay out of this war, and gather up what
Europe was wasting, she would soon be in actual possession of the
capital of the world. There was a kind of logic in Bayliss'
utterances that shook Nat Wheeler's imperturbable assumption that
one point of view was as good as another. When Bayliss fought the
dram and the cigarette, Wheeler only laughed. That a son of his
should turn out a Prohibitionist, was a joke he could appreciate.
But Bayliss' attitude in the present crisis disturbed him. Day
after day he sat about his son's place of business, interrupting
his arguments with funny stories. Bayliss did not go home at all
that month. He said to his father, "No, Mother's too violent. I'd
better not."

Claude and his mother read the papers in the evening, but they
talked so little about what they read that Mahailey inquired
anxiously whether they weren't still fighting over yonder. When
she could get Claude alone for a moment, she pulled out Sunday
supplement pictures of the devastated countries and asked him to
tell her what was to become of this family, photographed among
the ruins of their home; of this old woman, who sat by the
roadside with her bundles. "Where's she goin' to, anyways ? See,
Mr. Claude, she's got her iron cook-pot, pore old thing, carryin'
it all the way!"

Pictures of soldiers in gas-masks puzzled her; gas was something
she hadn't learned about in the Civil War, so she worked it out
for herself that these masks were worn by the army cooks, to
protect their eyes when they were cutting up onions! "All them
onions they have to cut up, it would put their eyes out if they
didn't wear somethin'," she argued.

On the morning of the eighth of April Claude came downstairs
early and began to clean his boots, which were caked with dry
mud. Mahailey was squatting down beside her stove, blowing and
puffing into it. The fire was always slow to start in heavy
weather. Claude got an old knife and a brush, and putting his
foot on a chair over by the west window, began to scrape his
shoe. He had said good-morning to Mahailey, nothing more. He
hadn't slept well, and was pale.

"Mr. Claude," Mahailey grumbled, "this stove ain't never drawed
good like my old one Mr. Ralph took away from me. I can't do
nothin' with it. Maybe you'll clean it out for me next Sunday."

"I'll clean it today, if you say so. I won't be here next Sunday.
I'm going away."

Something in his tone made Mahailey get up, her eyes still
blinking with the smoke, and look at him sharply. "You ain't
goin' off there where Miss Enid is ?" she asked anxiously.

"No, Mahailey." He had dropped the shoebrush and stood with one
foot on the chair, his elbow on his knee, looking out of the
window as if he had forgotten himself. "No, I'm not going to
China. I'm going over to help fight the Germans."

He was still staring out at the wet fields. Before he could stop
her, before he knew what she was doing, she had caught and kissed
his unworthy hand.

"I knowed you would," she sobbed. "I always knowed you would, you
nice boy, you! Old Mahail' knowed!"

Her upturned face was working all over; her mouth, her eyebrows,
even the wrinkles on her low forehead were working and twitching.
Claude felt a tightening in his throat as he tenderly regarded
that face; behind the pale eyes, under the low brow where there
was not room for many thoughts, an idea was struggling and
tormenting her. The same idea that had been tormenting him.

"You're all right, Mahailey," he muttered, patting her back and
turning away. "Now hurry breakfast."

"You ain't told your mudder yit ?" she whispered.

"No, not yet. But she'll be all right, too." He caught up his cap
and went down to the barn to look after the horses.

When Claude returned, the family were already at the breakfast
table. He slipped into his seat and watched his mother while she
drank her first cup of coffee. Then he addressed his father.

"Father, I don't see any use of waiting for the draft. If you can
spare me, I'd like to get into a training camp somewhere. I
believe I'd stand a chance of getting a commission."

"I shouldn't wonder." Mr. Wheeler poured maple syrup on his
pancakes with a liberal hand. "How do you feel about it,
Evangeline ?"

Mrs. Wheeler had quietly put down her knife and fork. She looked
at her husband in vague alarm, while her fingers moved restlessly
about over the tablecloth.

"I thought," Claude went on hastily, "that maybe I would go up to
Omaha tomorrow and find out where the training camps are to be
located, and have a talk with the men in charge of the enlistment
station. Of course," he added lightly, "they may not want me. I
haven't an idea what the requirements are."

"No, I don't understand much about it either." Mr. Wheeler rolled
his top pancake and conveyed it to his mouth. After a moment of
mastication he said, "You figure on going tomorrow ?"

"I'd like to. I won't bother with baggage--some shirts and
underclothes in my suitcase. If the Government wants me, it will
clothe me."

Mr. Wheeler pushed back his plate. "Well, now I guess you'd
better come out with me and look at the wheat. I don't know but
I'd best plough up that south quarter and put it in corn. I don't
believe it will make anything much."

When Claude and his father went out of the door, Dan sprang up
with more alacrity than usual and plunged after them. He did not
want to be left alone with Mrs. Wheeler. She remained sitting at
the foot of the deserted breakfast table. She was not crying. Her
eyes were utterly sightless. Her back was so stooped that she
seemed to be bending under a burden. Mahailey cleared the dishes
away quietly.

Out in the muddy fields Claude finished his talk with his father.
He explained that he wanted to slip away without saying good-bye
to any one. "I have a way, you know," he said, flushing, "of
beginning things and not getting very far with them. I don't want
anything said about this until I'm sure. I may be rejected for
one reason or another."

Mr. Wheeler smiled. "I guess not. However, I'll tell Dan to keep
his mouth shut. Will you just go over to Leonard Dawson's and get
that wrench he borrowed ? It's about noon, and he'll likely be at
home." Claude found big Leonard watering his team at the
windmill. When Leonard asked him what he thought of the
President's message, he blurted out at once that he was going to
Omaha to enlist. Leonard reached up and pulled the lever that
controlled the almost motionless wheel.

"Better wait a few weeks and I'll go with you. I'm going to try
for the Marines. They take my eye."

Claude, standing on the edge of the tank, almost fell backward.
"Why, what--what for ?"

Leonard looked him over. "Good Lord, Claude, you ain't the only
fellow around here that wears pants! What for ? Well, I'll tell
you what for," he held up three large red fingers threateningly;
"Belgium, the Lusitania, Edith Cavell. That dirt's got under my
skin. I'll get my corn planted, and then Father'll look after
Susie till I come back."

Claude took a long breath. "Well, Leonard, you fooled me. I
believed all this chaff you've been giving me about not caring
who chewed up who."

"And no more do I care," Leonard protested, "not a damn! But
there's a limit. I've been ready to go since the Lusitania. I
don't get any satisfaction out of my place any more. Susie feels
the same way."

Claude looked at his big neighbour. "Well, I'm off tomorrow,
Leonard. Don't mention it to my folks, but if I can't get into
the army, I'm going to enlist in the navy. They'll always take an
able-bodied man. I'm not coming back here." He held out his hand
and Leonard took it with a smack.

"Good luck, Claude. Maybe we'll meet in foreign parts. Wouldn't
that be a joke! Give my love to Enid when you write. I always did
think she was a fine girl, though I disagreed with her on
Prohibition." Claude crossed the fields mechanically, without
looking where he went. His power of vision was turned inward upon
scenes and events wholly imaginary as yet.



IX

One bright June day Mr. Wheeler parked his car in a line of
motors before the new pressed-brick Court house in Frankfort. The
Court house stood in an open square, surrounded by a grove of
cotton-woods. The lawn was freshly cut, and the flower beds were
blooming. When Mr. Wheeler entered the courtroom upstairs, it was
already half-full of farmers and townspeople, talking in low
tones while the summer flies buzzed in and out of the open
windows. The judge, a one-armed man, with white hair and
side-whiskers, sat at his desk, writing with his left hand. He
was an old settler in Frankfort county, but from his frockcoat
and courtly manners you might have thought he had come from
Kentucky yesterday instead of thirty years ago. He was to hear
this morning a charge of disloyalty brought against two German
farmers. One of the accused was August Yoeder, the Wheelers'
nearest neighbour, and the other was Troilus Oberlies, a rich
German from the northern part of the county.

Oberlies owned a beautiful farm and lived in a big white house
set on a hill, with a fine orchard, rows of beehives, barns,
granaries, and poultry yards. He raised turkeys and
tumbler-pigeons, and many geese and ducks swam about on his
cattleponds. He used to boast that he had six sons, "like our
German Emperor." His neighbours were proud of his place, and
pointed it out to strangers. They told how Oberlies had come to
Frankfort county a poor man, and had made his fortune by his
industry and intelligence. He had twice crossed the ocean to
re-visit his fatherland, and when he returned to his home on the
prairies he brought presents for every one; his lawyer, his
banker, and the merchants with whom he dealt in Frankfort and
Vicount. Each of his neighbours had in his parlour some piece of
woodcarving or weaving, or some ingenious mechanical toy that
Oberlies had picked up in Germany. He was an older man than
Yoeder, wore a short beard that was white and curly, like his
hair, and though he was low in stature, his puffy red face and
full blue eyes, and a certain swagger about his carriage, gave
him a look of importance. He was boastful and quick-tempered, but
until the war broke out in Europe nobody had ever had any trouble
with him. Since then he had constantly found fault and
complained,--everything was better in the Old Country.

Mr. Wheeler had come to town prepared to lend Yoeder a hand if he
needed one. They had worked adjoining fields for thirty years
now. He was surprised that his neighbour had got into trouble. He
was not a blusterer, like Oberlies, but a big, quiet man, with a
serious, large-featured face, and a stern mouth that seldom
opened. His countenance might have been cut out of red sandstone,
it was so heavy and fixed. He and Oberlies sat on two wooden
chairs outside the railing of the judge's desk.

Presently the judge stopped writing and said he would hear the
charges against Troilus Oberlies. Several neighbours took the
stand in succession; their complaints were confused and almost
humorous. Oberlies had said the United States would be licked,
and that would be a good thing; America was a great country, but
it was run by fools, and to be governed by Germany was the best
thing that could happen to it. The witness went on to say that
since Oberlies had made his money in this country--

Here the judge interrupted him. "Please confine yourself to
statements which you consider disloyal, made in your presence by
the defendant." While the witness proceeded, the judge took off
his glasses and laid them on the desk and began to polish the
lenses with a silk handkerchief, trying them, and rubbing them
again, as if he desired to see clearly.

A second witness had heard Oberlies say he hoped the German
submarines would sink a few troopships; that would frighten the
Americans and teach them to stay at home and mind their own
business. A third complained that on Sunday afternoons the old
man sat on his front porch and played Die Wacht am Rhein on a
slide-trombone, to the great annoyance of his neighbours. Here
Nat Wheeler slapped his knee with a loud guffaw, and a titter ran
through the courtroom. The defendant's puffy red cheeks seemed
fashioned by his Maker to give voice to that piercing instrument.

When asked if he had anything to say to these charges, the old
man rose, threw back his shoulders, and cast a defiant glance at
the courtroom. "You may take my property and imprison me, but I
explain nothing, and I take back nothing," he declared in a loud
voice.

The judge regarded his inkwell with a smile. "You mistake the
nature of this occasion, Mr. Oberlies. You are not asked to
recant. You are merely asked to desist from further disloyal
utterances, as much for your own protection and comfort as from
consideration for the feelings of your neighbours. I will now
hear the charges against Mr. Yoeder."

Mr. Yoeder, a witness declared, had said he hoped the United
States would go to Hell, now that it had been bought over by
England. When the witness had remarked to him that if the Kaiser
were shot it would end the war, Yoeder replied that charity
begins at home, and he wished somebody would put a bullet in the
President.

When he was called upon, Yoeder rose and stood like a rock before
the judge. "I have nothing to say. The charges are true. I
thought this was a country where a man could speak his mind."

"Yes, a man can speak his mind, but even here he must take the
consequences. Sit down, please." The judge leaned back in his
chair, and looking at the two men in front of him, began with
deliberation: "Mr. Oberlies, and Mr. Yoeder, you both know, and
your friends and neighbours know, why you are here. You have not
recognized the element of appropriateness, which must be regarded
in nearly all the transactions of life; many of our civil laws
are founded upon it. You have allowed a sentiment, noble in
itself, to carry you away and lead you to make extravagant
statements which I am confident neither of you mean. No man can
demand that you cease from loving the country of your birth; but
while you enjoy the benefits of this country, you should not
defame its government to extol another. You both admit to
utterances which I can only adjudge disloyal. I shall fine you
each three hundred dollars; a very light fine under the
circumstances. If I should have occasion to fix a penalty a
second time, it will be much more severe."

After the case was concluded, Mr. Wheeler joined his neighbour at
the door and they went downstairs together.

"Well, what do you hear from Claude ?" Mr. Yoeder asked.

"He's still at Fort R--. He expects to get home on leave before
he sails. Gus, you'll have to lend me one of your boys to
cultivate my corn. The weeds are getting away from me."

"Yes, you can have any of my boys,--till the draft gets 'em,"
said Yoeder sourly.

"I wouldn't worry about it. A little military training is good
for a boy. You fellows know that." Mr. Wheeler winked, and
Yoeder's grim mouth twitched at one corner.

That evening at supper Mr. Wheeler gave his wife a full account
of the court hearing, so that she could write it to Claude. Mrs.
Wheeler, always more a school-teacher than a housekeeper, wrote a
rapid, easy hand, and her long letters to Claude reported all the
neighbourhood doings. Mr. Wheeler furnished much of the material
for them. Like many long-married men he had fallen into the way
of withholding neighbourhood news from his wife. But since Claude
went away he reported to her everything in which he thought the
boy would be interested. As she laconically said in one of her
letters:

"Your father talks a great deal more at home than formerly, and
sometimes I think he is trying to take your place."



X

On the first day of July Claude Wheeler found himself in the fast
train from Omaha, going home for a week's leave. The uniform was
still an unfamiliar sight in July, 1917. The first draft was not
yet called, and the boys who had rushed off and enlisted were in
training camps far away. Therefore a redheaded young man with
long straight legs in puttees, and broad, energetic,
responsible-looking shoulders in close-fitting khaki, made a
conspicuous figure among the passengers. Little boys and young
girls peered at him over the tops of seats, men stopped in the
aisle to talk to him, old ladies put on their glasses and studied
his clothes, his bulky canvas hold-all, and even the book he kept
opening and forgetting to read.

The country that rushed by him on each side of the track was more
interesting to his trained eye than the pages of any book. He was
glad to be going through it at harvest,--the season when it is
most itself. He noted that there was more corn than usual,--much
of the winter wheat had been weather killed, and the fields were
ploughed up in the spring and replanted in maize. The pastures
were already burned brown, the alfalfa was coming green again
after its first cutting. Binders and harvesters were abroad in
the wheat and oats, gathering the soft-breathing billows of grain
into wide, subduing arms. When the train slowed down for a
trestle in a wheat field, harvesters in blue shirts and overalls
and wide straw hats stopped working to wave at the passengers.
Claude turned to the old man in the opposite seat. "When I see
those fellows, I feel as if I'd wakened up in the wrong clothes."

His neighbour looked pleased and smiled. "That the kind of
uniform you're accustomed to ?"

"I surely never wore anything else in the month of July," Claude
admitted. "When I find myself riding along in a train, in the
middle of harvest, trying to learn French verbs, then I know the
world is turned upside down, for a fact!"

The old man pressed a cigar upon him and began to question him.
Like the hero of the Odyssey upon his homeward journey, Claude
had often to tell what his country was, and who were the parents
that begot him. He was constantly interrupted in his perusal of a
French phrase-book (made up of sentences chosen for their
usefulness to soldiers,--such as; "Non, jamais je ne regarde les
femmes") by the questions of curious strangers. Presently he
gathered up his luggage, shook hands with his neighbour, and put
on his hat--the same old Stetson, with a gold cord and two hard
tassels added to its conical severity. "I get off at this station
and wait for the freight that goes down to Frankfort; the
cotton-tail, we call it."

The old man wished him a pleasant visit home, and the best of
luck in days to come. Every one in the car smiled at him as he
stepped down to the platform with his suitcase in one hand and
his canvas bag in the other. His old friend, Mrs. Voigt, the
German woman, stood out in front of her restaurant, ringing her
bell to announce that dinner was ready for travellers. A crowd of
young boys stood about her on the sidewalk, laughing and shouting
in disagreeable, jeering tones. As Claude approached, one of them
snatched the bell from her hand, ran off across the tracks with
it, and plunged into a cornfield. The other boys followed, and
one of them shouted, "Don't go in there to eat, soldier. She's a
German spy, and she'll put ground glass in your dinner!"

Claude swept into the lunch room and threw his bags on the floor.
"What's the matter, Mrs. Voigt ? Can I do anything for you ?"

She was sitting on one of her own stools, crying piteously, her
false frizzes awry. Looking up, she gave a little screech of
recognition. "Oh, I tank Gott it was you, and no more trouble
coming! You know I ain't no spy nor nodding, like what dem boys
say. Dem young fellers is dreadful rough mit me. I sell dem candy
since dey was babies, an' now dey turn on me like dis.
Hindenburg, dey calls me, and Kaiser Bill!" She began to cry
again, twisting her stumpy little fingers as if she would tear
them off.

"Give me some dinner, ma'am, and then I'll go and settle with
that gang. I've been away for a long time, and it seemed like
getting home when I got off the train and saw your squaw vines
running over the porch like they used to."

"Ya ? You remember dat ?" she wiped her eyes. "I got a pot-pie
today, and green peas, chust a few, out of my own garden."

"Bring them along, please. We don't get anything but canned stuff
in camp."

Some railroad men came in for lunch. Mrs. Voigt beckoned Claude
off to the end of the counter, where, after she had served her
customers, she sat down and talked to him, in whispers.

"My, you look good in dem clothes," she said patting his sleeve.
"I can remember some wars, too; when we got back dem provinces
what Napoleon took away from us, Alsace and Lorraine. Dem boys is
passed de word to come and put tar on me some night, and I am
skeered to go in my bet. I chust wrap in a quilt and sit in my
old chair."

"Don't pay any attention to them. You don't have trouble with the
business people here, do you ?"

"No-o, not troubles, exactly." She hesitated, then leaned
impulsively across the counter and spoke in his ear. "But it
ain't all so bad in de Old Country like what dey say. De poor
people ain't slaves, and dey ain't ground down like what dey say
here. Always de forester let de poor folks come into de wood and
carry off de limbs dat fall, and de dead trees. Und if de rich
farmer have maybe a liddle more manure dan he need, he let de
poor man come and take some for his land. De poor folks don't git
such wages like here, but dey lives chust as comfortable. Und dem
wooden shoes, what dey makes such fun of, is cleaner dan what
leather is, to go round in de mud and manure. Dey don't git so
wet and dey don't stink so."

Claude could see that her heart was bursting with homesickness,
full of tender memories of the far-away time and land of her
youth. She had never talked to him of these things before, but
now she poured out a flood of confidences about the big dairy
farm on which she had worked as a girl; how she took care of nine
cows, and how the cows, though small, were very strong,--drew a
plough all day and yet gave as much milk at night as if they had
been browsing in a pasture! The country people never had to spend
money for doctors, but cured all diseases with roots and herbs,
and when the old folks had the rheumatism they took "one of dem
liddle jenny-pigs" to bed with them, and the guinea-pig drew out
all the pain.

Claude would have liked to listen longer, but he wanted to find
the old woman's tormentors before his train came in. Leaving his
bags with her, he crossed the railroad tracks, guided by an
occasional teasing tinkle of the bell in the cornfield. Presently
he came upon the gang, a dozen or more, lying in a shallow draw
that ran from the edge of the field out into an open pasture. He
stood on the edge of the bank and looked down at them, while he
slowly cut off the end of a cigar and lit it. The boys grinned at
him, trying to appear indifferent and at ease.

"Looking for any one, soldier ?" asked the one with the bell.

"Yes, I am. I'm looking for that bell. You'll have to take it
back where it belongs. You every one of you know there's no harm
in that old woman."

"She's a German, and we're fighting the Germans, ain't we ?"

"I don't think you'll ever fight any. You'd last about ten
minutes in the American army. You're not our kind. There's only
one army in the world that wants men who'll bully old women. You
might get a job with them."

The boys giggled. Claude beckoned impatiently. "Come along with
that bell, kid."

The boy rose slowly and climbed the bank out of the gully. As
they tramped back through the cornfield, Claude turned to him
abruptly. "See here, aren't you ashamed of yourself ?"

"Oh, I don't know about that!" the boy replied airily, tossing
the bell up like a ball and catching it.

"Well, you ought to be. I didn't expect to see anything of this
kind until I got to the front. I'll be back here in a week, and
I'll make it hot for anybody that's been bothering her." Claude's
train was pulling in, and he ran for his baggage. Once seated in
the "cotton-tail," he began going down into his own country,
where he knew every farm he passed,--knew the land even when he
did not know the owner, what sort of crops it yielded, and about
how much it was worth. He did not recognize these farms with the
pleasure he had anticipated, because he was so angry about the
indignities Mrs. Voigt had suffered. He was still burning with
the first ardour of the enlisted man. He believed that he was
going abroad with an expeditionary force that would make war
without rage, with uncompromising generosity and chivalry.

Most of his friends at camp shared his Quixotic ideas. They had
come together from farms and shops and mills and mines, boys from
college and boys from tough joints in big cities; sheepherders,
street car drivers, plumbers' assistants, billiard markers.
Claude had seen hundreds of them when they first came in; "show
men" in cheap, loud sport suits, ranch boys in knitted
waistcoats, machinists with the grease still on their fingers,
farm-hands like Dan, in their one Sunday coat. Some of them
carried paper suitcases tied up with rope, some brought all they
had in a blue handkerchief. But they all came to give and not to
ask, and what they offered was just themselves; their big red
hands, their strong backs, the steady, honest, modest look in
their eyes. Sometimes, when he had helped the medical examiner,
Claude had noticed the anxious expression in the faces of the
long lines of waiting men. They seemed to say, "If I'm good
enough, take me. I'll stay by." He found them like that to work
with; serviceable, good-natured, and eager to learn. If they
talked about the war, or the enemy they were getting ready to
fight, it was usually in a facetious tone; they were going to
"can the Kaiser," or to make the Crown Prince work for a living.
Claude, loved the men he trained with,--wouldn't choose to live
in any better company.

The freight train swung into the river valley that meant
home,--the place the mind always came back to, after its farthest
quest. Rapidly the farms passed; the haystacks, the cornfields,
the familiar red barns--then the long coal sheds and the water
tank, and the train stopped.

On the platform he saw Ralph and Mr. Royce, waiting to welcome
him. Over there, in the automobile, were his father and mother,
Mr. Wheeler in the driver's seat. A line of motors stood along
the siding. He was the first soldier who had come home, and some
of the townspeople had driven down to see him arrive in his
uniform. From one car Susie Dawson waved to him, and from another
Gladys Farmer. While he stopped and spoke to them, Ralph took his
bags.

"Come along, boys," Mr. Wheeler called, tooting his horn, and he
hurried the soldier away, leaving only a cloud of dust behind.

Mr. Royce went over to old man Dawson's car and said rather
childishly, "It can't be that Claude's grown taller ? I suppose
it's the way they learn to carry themselves. He always was a
manly looking boy."

"I expect his mother's a proud woman," said Susie, very much
excited. "It's too bad Enid can't be here to see him. She would
never have gone away if she'd known all that was to happen."

Susie did not mean this as a thrust, but it took effect. Mr.
Royce turned away and lit a cigar with some difficulty. His hands
had grown very unsteady this last year, though he insisted that
his general health was as good as ever. As he grew older, he was
more depressed by the conviction that his women-folk had added
little to the warmth and comfort of the world. Women ought to do
that, whatever else they did. He felt apologetic toward the
Wheelers and toward his old friends. It seemed as if his
daughters had no heart.



XI
Camp habits persisted. On his first morning at home Claude came
downstairs before even Mahailey was stirring, and went out to
have a look at the stock. The red sun came up just as he was
going down the hill toward the cattle corral, and he had the
pleasant feeling of being at home, on his father's land. Why was
it so gratifying to be able to say "our hill," and "our creek
down yonder" ? to feel the crunch of this particular dried mud
under his boots ?

When he went into the barn to see the horses, the first creatures
to meet his eye were the two big mules that had run away with
him, standing in the stalls next the door. It flashed upon Claude
that these muscular quadrupeds were the actual authors of his
fate. If they had not bolted with him and thrown him into the
wire fence that morning, Enid would not have felt sorry for him
and come to see him every day, and his life might have turned out
differently. Perhaps if older people were a little more honest,
and a boy were not taught to idealize in women the very qualities
which can make him utterly unhappy--But there, he had got away
from those regrets. But wasn't it just like him to be dragged
into matrimony by a pair of mules!

He laughed as he looked at them. "You old devils, you're strong
enough to play such tricks on green fellows for years to come.
You're chock full of meanness!"

One of the animals wagged an ear and cleared his throat
threateningly. Mules are capable of strong affections, but they
hate snobs, are the enemies of caste, and this pair had always
seemed to detect in Claude what his father used to call his
"false pride." When he was a young lad they had been a source of
humiliation to him, braying and balking in public places, trying
to show off at the lumber yard or in front of the post office.

At the end manger Claude found old Molly, the grey mare with the
stiff leg, who had grown a second hoof on her off forefoot, an
achievement not many horses could boast of. He was sure she
recognized him; she nosed his hand and arm and turned back her
upper lip, showing her worn, yellow teeth.

"Mustn't do that, Molly," he said as he stroked her. "A dog can
laugh, but it makes a horse look foolish. Seems to me Dan might
curry you about once a week!" He took a comb from its niche
behind a joist and gave her old coat a rubbing. Her white hair
was flecked all over with little rust-coloured dashes, like India
ink put on with a fine brush, and her mane and tail had turned a
greenish yellow. She must be eighteen years old, Claude reckoned,
as he polished off her round, heavy haunches. He and Ralph used
to ride her over to the Yoeders' when they were barefoot
youngsters, guiding her with a rope halter, and kicking at the
leggy colt that was always running alongside.

When he entered the kitchen and asked Mahailey for warm water to
wash his hands, she sniffed him disapprovingly.

"Why, Mr. Claude, you've been curryin' that old mare, and you've
got white hairs all over your soldier-clothes. You're jist
covered!"

If his uniform stirred feeling in people of sober judgment, over
Mahailey it cast a spell. She was so dazzled by it that all the
time Claude was at home she never once managed to examine it in
detail. Before she got past his puttees, her powers of
observation were befogged by excitement, and her wits began to
jump about like monkeys in a cage. She had expected his uniform
to be blue, like those she remembered, and when he walked into
the kitchen last night she scarcely knew what to make of him.
After Mrs. Wheeler explained to her that American soldiers didn't
wear blue now, Mahailey repeated to herself that these brown
clothes didn't show the dust, and that Claude would never look
like the bedraggled men who used to stop to drink at her mother's
spring.

"Them leather leggins is to keep the briars from scratchin' you,
ain't they ? I 'spect there's an awful lot of briars over there,
like them long blackberry vines in the fields in Virginia. Your
madder says the soldiers git lice now, like they done in our war.
You jist carry a little bottle of coal-oil in your pocket an' rub
it on your head at night. It keeps the nits from hatchin'."

Over the flour barrel in the corner Mahailey had tacked a Red
Cross poster; a charcoal drawing of an old woman poking with a
stick in a pile of plaster and twisted timbers that had once been
her home. Claude went over to look at it while he dried his
hands.

"Where did you get your picture ?"

"She's over there where you're goin', Mr. Claude. There she is,
huntin' for somethin' to cook with; no stove nor no dishes nor
nothin'--everything all broke up. I reckon she'll be mighty glad
to see you comin'."

Heavy footsteps sounded on the stairs, and Mahailey whispered
hastily, "Don't forgit about the coal-oil, and don't you be lousy
if you can help it, honey." She considered lice in the same class
with smutty jokes,--things to be whispered about.

After breakfast Mr. Wheeler took Claude out to the fields, where
Ralph was directing the harvesters. They watched the binder for a
while, then went over to look at the haystacks and alfalfa, and
walked along the edge of the cornfield, where they examined the
young ears. Mr. Wheeler explained and exhibited the farm to
Claude as if he were a stranger; the boy had a curious feeling of
being now formally introduced to these acres on which he had
worked every summer since he was big enough to carry water to the
harvesters. His father told him how much land they owned, and how
much it was worth, and that it was unencumbered except for a
trifling mortgage he had given on one quarter when he took over
the Colorado ranch.

"When you come back," he said, "you and Ralph won't have to hunt
around to get into business. You'll both be well fixed. Now you'd
better go home by old man Dawson's and drop in to see Susie.
Everybody about here was astonished when Leonard went." He walked
with Claude to the corner where the Dawson land met his own. "By
the way," he said as he turned back, "don't forget to go in to
see the Yoeders sometime. Gus is pretty sore since they had him
up in court. Ask for the old grandmother. You remember she never
learned any English. And now they've told her it's dangerous to
talk German, she don't talk at all and hides away from everybody.
If I go by early in the morning, when she's out weeding the
garden, she runs and squats down in the gooseberry bushes till
I'm out of sight."

Claude decided he would go to the Yoeders' today, and to the
Dawsons' tomorrow. He didn't like to think there might be hard
feeling toward him in a house where he had had so many good
times, and where he had often found a refuge when things were
dull at home. The Yoeder boys had a music-box long before the
days of Victrolas, and a magic lantern, and the old grandmother
made wonderful shadow-pictures on a sheet, and told stories about
them. She used to turn the map of Europe upside down on the
kitchen table and showed the children how, in this position, it
looked like a jungfrau; and recited a long German rhyme which
told how Spain was the maiden's head, the Pyrenees her lace ruff,
Germany her heart and bosom, England and Italy were two arms, and
Russia, though it looked so big, was only a hoopskirt. This rhyme
would probably be condemned as dangerous propaganda now!

As he walked on alone, Claude was thinking how this country that
had once seemed little and dull to him, now seemed large and rich
in variety. During the months in camp he had been wholly absorbed
in new work and new friendships, and now his own neighbourhood
came to him with the freshness of things that have been forgotten
for a long while,--came together before his eyes as a harmonious
whole. He was going away, and he would carry the whole
countryside in his mind, meaning more to him than it ever had
before. There was Lovely Creek, gurgling on down there, where he
and Ernest used to sit and lament that the book of History was
finished; that the world had come to avaricious old age and noble
enterprise was dead for ever. But he was going away....

That afternoon Claude spent with his mother. It was the first
time she had had him to herself. Ralph wanted terribly to stay
and hear his brother talk, but understanding how his mother felt,
he went back to the wheat field. There was no detail of Claude's
life in camp so trivial that Mrs. Wheeler did not want to hear
about it. She asked about the mess, the cooks, the laundry, as
well as about his own duties. She made him describe the bayonet
drill and explain the operation of machine guns and automatic
rifles.

"I hardly see how we can bear the anxiety when our transports
begin to sail," she said thoughtfully. "If they can once get you
all over there, I am not afraid; I believe our boys are as good
as any in the world. But with submarines reported off our own
coast, I wonder how the Government can get our men across safely.
The thought of transports going down with thousands of young men
on board is something so terrible--" she put her hands quickly
over her eyes.

Claude, sitting opposite his mother, wondered what it was about
her hands that made them so different from any others he had ever
seen. He had always known they were different, but now he must
look closely and see why. They were slender, and always white,
even when the nails were stained at preserving time. Her fingers
arched back at the joints, as if they were shrinking from
contacts. They were restless, and when she talked often brushed
her hair or her dress lightly. When she was excited she sometimes
put her hand to her throat, or felt about the neck of her gown,
as if she were searching for a forgotten brooch. They were
sensitive hands, and yet they seemed to have nothing to do with
sense, to be almost like the groping fingers of a spirit.

"How do you boys feel about it ?"

Claude started. "About what, Mother ? Oh, the transportation! We
don't worry about that. It's the Government's job to get us
across. A soldier mustn't worry about anything except what he's
directly responsible for. If the Germans should sink a few troop
ships, it would be unfortunate, certainly, but it wouldn't cut any
figure in the long run. The British are perfecting an enormous
dirigible, built to carry passengers. If our transports are sunk,
it will only mean delay. In another year the Yankees will be
flying over. They can't stop us."

Mrs. Wheeler bent forward. "That must be boys' talk, Claude.
Surely you don't believe such a thing could be practicable ?"

"Absolutely. The British are depending on their aircraft
designers to do just that, if everything else fails. Of course,
nobody knows yet how effective the submarines will be in our
case."

Mrs. Wheeler again shaded her eyes with her hand. "When I was
young, back in Vermont, I used to wish that I had lived in the
old times when the world went ahead by leaps and bounds. And now,
I feel as if my sight couldn't bear the glory that beats upon it.
It seems as if we would have to be born with new faculties, to
comprehend what is going on in the air and under the sea."



XII

The afternoon sun was pouring in at the back windows of Mrs.
Farmer's long, uneven parlour, making the dusky room look like a
cavern with a fire at one end of it. The furniture was all in its
cool, figured summer cretonnes. The glass flower vases that stood
about on little tables caught the sunlight and twinkled like tiny
lamps. Claude had been sitting there for a long while, and he
knew he ought to go. Through the window at his elbow he could see
rows of double hollyhocks, the flat leaves of the sprawling
catalpa, and the spires of the tangled mint bed, all transparent
in the gold-powdered light. They had talked about everything but
the thing he had come to say. As he looked out into the garden he
felt that he would never get it out. There was something in the
way the mint bed burned and floated that made one a
fatalist,--afraid to meddle. But after he was far away, he would
regret; uncertainty would tease him like a splinter in his thumb.

He rose suddenly and said without apology: "Gladys, I wish I
could feel sure you'd never marry my brother."

She did not reply, but sat in her easy chair, looking up at him
with a strange kind of calmness.

"I know all the advantages," he went on hastily, "but they
wouldn't make it up to you. That sort of a--compromise would make
you awfully unhappy. I know."

"I don't think I shall ever marry Bayliss," Gladys spoke in her
usual low, round voice, but her quick breathing showed he had
touched something that hurt. "I suppose I have used him. It gives
a school-teacher a certain prestige if people think she can marry
the rich bachelor of the town whenever she wants to. But I am
afraid I won't marry him,--because you are the member of the
family I have always admired."

Claude turned away to the window. "A fine lot I've been to
admire," he muttered.

"Well, it's true, anyway. It was like that when we went to High
School, and it's kept up. Everything you do always seems exciting
to me."

Claude felt a cold perspiration on his forehead. He wished now
that he had never come. "But that's it, Gladys. What HAVE I ever
done, except make one blunder after another ?"

She came over to the window and stood beside him. "I don't know;
perhaps it's by their blunders that one gets to know people,--by
what they can't do. If you'd been like all the rest, you could
have got on in their way. That was the one thing I couldn't have
stood."

Claude was frowning out into the flaming garden. He had not heard
a word of her reply. "Why didn't you keep me from making a fool
of myself ?" he asked in a low voice.

"I think I tried--once. Anyhow, it's all turning out better than
I thought. You didn't get stuck here. You've found your place.
You're sailing away. You've just begun."

"And what about you ?"

She laughed softly. "Oh, I shall teach in the High School!"

Claude took her hands and they stood looking searchingly at each
other in the swimming golden light that made everything
transparent. He never knew exactly how he found his hat and made
his way out of the house. He was only sure that Gladys did not
accompany him to the door. He glanced back once, and saw her head
against the bright window.

She stood there, exactly where he left her, and watched the
evening come on, not moving, scarcely breathing. She was thinking
how often, when she came downstairs, she would see him standing
here by the window, or moving about in the dusky room, looking at
last as he ought to look,--like his convictions and the choice he
had made. She would never let this house be sold for taxes now.
She would save her salary and pay them off. She could never like
any other room so well as this. It had always been a refuge from
Frankfort; and now there would be this vivid, confident figure,
an image as distinct to her as the portrait of her grandfather
upon the wall.



XIII

Sunday was Claude's last day at home, and he took a long walk
with Ernest and Ralph. Ernest would have preferred to lose
Ralph, but when the boy was out of the harvest field he stuck to
his brother like a burr. There was something about Claude's new
clothes and new manner that fascinated him, and he went through
one of those sudden changes of feeling that often occur in
families. Although they had been better friends ever since
Claude's wedding, until now Ralph had always felt a little
ashamed of him. Why, he used to ask himself, wouldn't Claude
"spruce up and be somebody" ? Now, he was struck by the fact that
he was somebody.

On Monday morning Mrs. Wheeler wakened early, with a faintness in
her chest. This was the day on which she must acquit herself
well. Breakfast would be Claude's last meal at home. At eleven
o'clock his father and Ralph would take him to Frankfort to catch
the train. She was longer than usual in dressing. When she got
downstairs Claude and Mahailey were already talking. He was
shaving in the washroom, and Mahailey stood watching him, a side
of bacon in her hand.

"You tell 'em over there I'm awful sorry about them old women,
with their dishes an' their stove all broke up."

"All right. I will." Claude scraped away at his chin.

She lingered. "Maybe you can help 'em mend their things, like you
do mine fur me," she suggested hopefully.

"Maybe," he murmured absently. Mrs. Wheeler opened the stair
door, and Mahailey dodged back to the stove.

After breakfast Dan went out to the fields with the harvesters.
Ralph and Claude and Mr. Wheeler were busy with the car all
morning.

Mrs. Wheeler kept throwing her apron over her head and going down
the hill to see what they were doing. Whether there was really
something the matter with the engine, or whether the men merely
made it a pretext for being together and keeping away from the
house, she did not know. She felt that her presence was not much
desired, and at last she went upstairs and resignedly watched
them from the sitting-room window. Presently she heard Ralph run
up to the third storey. When he came down with Claude's bags in
his hands, he stuck his head in at the door and shouted
cheerfully to his mother:

"No hurry. I'm just taking them down so they'll be ready."

Mrs. Wheeler ran after him, calling faintly, "Wait, Ralph! Are
you sure he's got everything in ? I didn't hear him packing."

"Everything ready. He says he won't have to go upstairs again.
He'll be along pretty soon. There's lots of time." Ralph shot
down through the basement.

Mrs. Wheeler sat down in her reading chair. They wanted to keep
her away, and it was a little selfish of them. Why couldn't they
spend these last hours quietly in the house, instead of dashing
in and out to frighten her ? Now she could hear the hot water
running in the kitchen; probably Mr. Wheeler had come in to wash
his hands. She felt really too weak to get up and go to the west
window to see if he were still down at the garage. Waiting was
now a matter of seconds, and her breath came short enough as it
was.

She recognized a heavy, hob-nailed boot on the stairs, mounting
quickly. When Claude entered, carrying his hat in his hand, she
saw by his walk, his shoulders, and the way he held his head,
that the moment had come, and that he meant to make it short. She
rose, reaching toward him as he came up to her and caught her in
his arms. She was smiling her little, curious intimate smile,
with half-closed eyes.

"Well, is it good-bye ?" she murmured. She passed her hands over
his shoulders, down his strong back and the close-fitting sides
of his coat, as if she were taking the mould and measure of his
mortal frame. Her chin came just to his breast pocket, and she
rubbed it against the heavy cloth. Claude stood looking down at
her without speaking a word. Suddenly his arms tightened and he
almost crushed her.

"Mother!" he whispered as he kissed her. He ran downstairs and
out of the house without looking back.

She struggled up from the chair where she had sunk and crept to
the window; he was vaulting down the hill as fast as he could go.
He jumped into the car beside his father. Ralph was already at
the wheel, and Claude had scarcely touched the cushions when they
were off. They ran down the creek and over the bridge, then up
the long hill on the other side. As they neared the crest of the
hill, Claude stood up in the car and looked back at the house,
waving his cone-shaped hat. She leaned out and strained her
sight, but her tears blurred everything. The brown, upright
figure seemed to float out of the car and across the fields, and
before he was actually gone, she lost him. She fell back against
the windowsill, clutching her temples with both hands, and broke
into choking, passionate speech. "Old eyes," she cried, "why do
you betray me ? Why do you cheat me of my last sight of my
splendid son!"


Book Four: The Voyage of the Anchises

I

A long train of crowded cars, the passengers all of the same sex,
almost of the same age, all dressed and hatted alike, was slowly
steaming through the green sea-meadows late on a summer
afternoon. In the cars, incessant stretching of cramped legs,
shifting of shoulders, striking of matches, passing of
cigarettes, groans of boredom; occasionally concerted laughter
about nothing. Suddenly the train stops short. Clipped heads and
tanned faces pop out at every window. The boys begin to moan and
shout; what is the matter now ?

The conductor goes through the cars, saying something about a
freight wreck on ahead; he has orders to wait here for half an
hour. Nobody pays any attention to him. A murmur of astonishment
rises from one side of the train. The boys crowd over to the
south windows. At last there is something to look at,--though
what they see is so strangely quiet that their own exclamations
are not very loud.

Their train is lying beside an arm of the sea that reaches far
into the green shore. At the edge of the still water stand the
hulls of four wooden ships, in the process of building. There is
no town, there are no smoke-stacks--very few workmen. Piles of
lumber lie about on the grass. A gasoline engine under a
temporary shelter is operating a long crane that reaches down
among the piles of boards and beams, lifts a load, silently and
deliberately swings it over to one of the skeleton vessels, and
lowers it somewhere into the body of the motionless thing. Along
the sides of the clean hulls a few riveters are at work; they sit
on suspended planks, lowering and raising themselves with
pulleys, like house painters. Only by listening very closely can
one hear the tap of their hammers. No orders are shouted, no thud
of heavy machinery or scream of iron drills tears the air. These
strange boats seem to be building themselves.

Some of the men got out of the cars and ran along the tracks,
asking each other how boats could be built off in the grass like
this. Lieutenant Claude Wheeler stretched his legs upon the
opposite seat and sat still at his window, looking down on this
strange scene. Shipbuilding, he had supposed, meant noise and
forges and engines and hosts of men. This was like a dream.
Nothing but green meadows, soft grey water, a floating haze of
mist a little rosy from the sinking sun, spectre-like seagulls,
flying slowly, with the red glow tinging their wings--and those
four hulls lying in their braces, facing the sea, deliberating by
the sea.

Claude knew nothing of ships or shipbuilding, but these craft did
not seem to be nailed together,--they seemed all of a piece, like
sculpture. They reminded him of the houses not made with hands;
they were like simple and great thoughts, like purposes forming
slowly here in the silence beside an unruffled arm of the
Atlantic. He knew nothing about ships, but he didn't have to; the
shape of those hulls--their strong, inevitable lines--told their
story, WAS their story; told the whole adventure of man with the
sea.

Wooden ships! When great passions and great aspirations stirred a
country, shapes like these formed along its shores to be the
sheath of its valour. Nothing Claude had ever seen or heard or
read or thought had made it all so clear as these untried wooden
bottoms. They were the very impulse, they were the potential act,
they were the "going over," the drawn arrow, the great unuttered
cry, they were Fate, they were tomorrow!...

The locomotive screeched to her scattered passengers, like an old
turkey-hen calling her brood. The soldier boys came running back
along the embankment and leaped aboard the train. The conductor
shouted they would be in Hoboken in time for supper.



II

It was midnight when the men had got their supper and began
unrolling their blankets to sleep on the floor of the long dock
waiting-rooms,--which in other days had been thronged by people
who came to welcome home-coming friends, or to bid them God-speed
to foreign shores. Claude and some of his men had tried to look
about them; but there was little to be seen. The bow of a boat,
painted in distracting patterns of black and white, rose at one
end of the shed, but the water itself was not visible. Down in
the cobble-paved street below they watched for awhile the long
line of drays and motor trucks that bumped all night into a vast
cavern lit by electricity, where crates and barrels and
merchandise of all kinds were piled, marked American
Expeditionary Forces; cases of electrical machinery from some
factory in Ohio, parts of automobiles, gun-carriages, bath-tubs,
hospital supplies, bales of cotton, cases of canned food, grey
metal tanks full of chemical fluids. Claude went back to the
waiting room, lay down and fell asleep with the glare of an
arc-light shining full in his face.

He was called at four in the morning and told where to report to
headquarters. Captain Maxey, stationed at a desk on one of the
landings, explained to his lieutenants that their company was to
sail at eight o'clock on the Anchises. It was an English boat, an
old liner pulled off the Australian trade, that could carry only
twenty-five hundred men. The crew was English, but part of the
stores,--the meat and fresh fruit and vegetables,--were furnished
by the United States Government. The Captain had been over the
boat during the night, and didn't like it very well. He had
expected to be scheduled for one of the fine big Hamburg-American
liners, with dining-rooms finished in rosewood, and ventilation
plants and cooling plants, and elevators running from top to
bottom like a New York office building. "However," he said,
"we'll have to make the best of it. They're using everything
that's got a bottom now."

The company formed for roll-call at one end of the shed, with
their packs and rifles. Breakfast was served to them while they
waited. After an hour's standing on the concrete, they saw
encouraging signs. Two gangplanks were lowered from the vessel at
the end of the slip, and up each of them began to stream a close
brown line of men in smart service caps. They recognized a
company of Kansas Infantry, and began to grumble because their
own service caps hadn't yet been given to them; they would have
to sail in their old Stetsons. Soon they were drawn into one of
the brown lines that went continuously up the gangways, like
belting running over machinery. On the deck one steward directed
the men down to the hold, and another conducted the officers to
their cabins. Claude was shown to a four-berth state-room. One of
his cabin mates, Lieutenant Fanning, of his own company, was
already there, putting his slender luggage in order. The steward
told them the officers were breakfasting in the dining saloon.

By seven o'clock all the troops were aboard, and the men were
allowed on deck. For the first time Claude saw the profile of New
York City, rising thin and gray against an opal-coloured morning
sky. The day had come on hot and misty. The sun, though it was
now high, was a red ball, streaked across with purple clouds. The
tall buildings, of which he had heard so much, looked
unsubstantial and illusionary,--mere shadows of grey and pink and
blue that might dissolve with the mist and fade away in it. The
boys were disappointed. They were Western men, accustomed to the
hard light of high altitudes, and they wanted to see the city
clearly; they couldn't make anything of these uneven towers that
rose dimly through the vapour. Everybody was asking questions.
Which of those pale giants was the Singer Building ? Which the
Woolworth ? What was the gold dome, dully glinting through the
fog ? Nobody knew. They agreed it was a shame they could not have
had a day in New York before they sailed away from it, and that
they would feel foolish in Paris when they had to admit they had
never so much as walked up Broadway. Tugs and ferry boats and
coal barges were moving up and down the oily river, all novel
sights to the men. Over in the Canard and French docks they saw
the first examples of the "camouflage" they had heard so much
about; big vessels daubed over in crazy patterns that made the
eyes ache, some in black and white, some in soft rainbow colours.

A tug steamed up alongside and fastened. A few moments later a
man appeared on the bridge and began to talk to the captain.
Young Fanning, who had stuck to Claude's side, told him this was
the pilot, and that his arrival meant they were going to start.
They could see the shiny instruments of a band assembling in the
bow.

"Let's get on the other side, near the rail if we can," said
Fanning. "The fellows are bunching up over here because they want
to look at the Goddess of Liberty as we go out. They don't even
know this boat turns around the minute she gets into the river.
They think she's going over stern first!"

It was not easy to cross the deck; every inch was covered by a
boot. The whole superstructure was coated with brown uniforms;
they clung to the boat davits, the winches, the railings and
ventilators, like bees in a swarm. Just as the vessel was backing
out, a breeze sprang up and cleared the air. Blue sky broke
overhead, and the pale silhouette of buildings on the long island
grew sharp and hard. Windows flashed flame-coloured in their grey
sides, the gold and bronze tops of towers began to gleam where
the sunlight struggled through. The transport was sliding down
toward the point, and to the left the eye caught the silver
cobweb of bridges, seen confusingly against each other.

"There she is!" "Hello, old girl!" "Good-bye, sweetheart!"

The swarm surged to starboard. They shouted and gesticulated to
the image they were all looking for,--so much nearer than they
had expected to see her, clad in green folds, with the mist
streaming up like smoke behind. For nearly every one of those
twenty-five hundred boys, as for Claude, it was their first
glimpse of the Bartholdi statue. Though she was such a definite
image in their minds, they had not imagined her in her setting of
sea and sky, with the shipping of the world coming and going at
her feet, and the moving cloud masses behind her. Post-card
pictures had given them no idea of the energy of her large
gesture, or how her heaviness becomes light among the vapourish
elements. "France gave her to us," they kept saying, as they
saluted her. Before Claude had got over his first thrill, the
Kansas band in the bow began playing "Over There." Two thousand
voices took it up, booming out over the water the gay,
indomitable resolution of that jaunty air.

A Staten Island ferry-boat passed close under the bow of the
transport. The passengers were office-going people, on their way
to work, and when they looked up and saw these hundreds of faces,
all young, all bronzed and grinning, they began to shout and wave
their handkerchiefs. One of the passengers was an old clergyman,
a famous speaker in his day, now retired, who went over to the
City every morning to write editorials for a church paper. He
closed the book he was reading, stood by the rail, and taking off
his hat began solemnly to quote from a poet who in his time was
still popular. "Sail on," he quavered,

  "Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State,
  Humanity, with all its fears,
  With all its hopes of future years,
  Is hanging breathless on thy fate."

As the troop ship glided down the sea lane, the old man still
watched it from the turtle-back. That howling swarm of brown arms
and hats and faces looked like nothing, but a crowd of American
boys going to a football game somewhere. But the scene was
ageless; youths were sailing away to die for an idea, a
sentiment, for the mere sound of a phrase... and on their
departure they were making vows to a bronze image in the sea.



III

All the first morning Tod Fanning showed Claude over the
boat,--not that Fanning had ever been on anything bigger than a
Lake Michigan steamer, but he knew a good deal about machinery,
and did not hesitate to ask the deck stewards to explain anything
he didn't know. The stewards, indeed all the crew, struck the
boys as an unusually good-natured and obliging set of men.

The fourth occupant of number 96, Claude's cabin, had not turned
up by noon, nor had any of his belongings, so the three who had
settled their few effects there began to hope they would have the
place to themselves. It would be crowded enough, at that. The
third bunk was assigned to an officer from the Kansas regiment,
Lieutenant Bird, a Virginian, who had been working in his uncle's
bank in Topeka when he enlisted. He and Claude sat together at
mess. When they were at lunch, the Virginian said in his very
gentle voice:

"Lieutenant, I wish you'd explain Lieutenant Fanning to me. He
seems very immature. He's been telling me about a submarine
destroyer he's invented, but it looks to me like foolishness."

Claude laughed. "Don't try to understand Fanning. Just let him
sink in, and you'll come to like him. I used to wonder how he
ever got a commission. You never can tell what crazy thing he'll
do."

Fanning had, for instance, brought on board a pair of white
flannel pants, his first and only tailor-made trousers, because
he had a premonition that the boat would make a port and that he
would be asked to a garden party! He had a way of using big words
in the wrong place, not because he tried to show off, but because
all words sounded alike to him. In the first days of their
acquaintance in camp he told Claude that this was a failing he
couldn't help, and that it was called "anaesthesia." Sometimes
this failing was confusing; when Fanning sententiously declared
that he would like to be on hand when the Crown Prince settled
his little account with Plato, Claude was perplexed until
subsequent witticisms revealed that the boy meant Pluto.

At three o'clock there was a band concert on deck. Claude fell
into talk with the bandmaster, and was delighted to find that he
came from Hillport, Kansas, a town where Claude had once been
with his father to buy cattle, and that all his fourteen men came
from Hillport. They were the town band, had enlisted in a body,
had gone into training together, and had never been separated.
One was a printer who helped to get out the Hillport Argus every
week, another clerked in a grocery store, another was the son of
a German watch repairer, one was still in High School, one worked
in an automobile livery. After supper Claude found them all
together, very much interested in their first evening at sea, and
arguing as to whether the sunset on the water was as fine as
those they saw every night in Hillport. They hung together in a
quiet, determined way, and if you began to talk to one, you soon
found that all the others were there.

When Claude and Fanning and Lieutenant Bird were undressing in
their narrow quarters that night, the fourth berth was still
unclaimed. They were in their bunks and almost asleep, when the
missing man came in and unceremoniously turned on the light. They
were astonished to see that he wore the uniform of the Royal
Flying Corps and carried a cane. He seemed very young, but the
three who peeped out at him felt that he must be a person of
consequence. He took off his coat with the spread wings on the
collar, wound his watch, and brushed his teeth with an air of
special personal importance. Soon after he had turned out the
light and climbed into the berth over Lieutenant Bird, a heavy
smell of rum spread in the close air.

Fanning, who slept under Claude, kicked the sagging mattress
above him and stuck his head out. "Hullo, Wheeler! What have you
got up there ?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing smells pretty good to me. I'll have some with anybody
that asks me."

No response from any quarter. Bird, the Virginian, murmured,
"Don't make a row," and they went to sleep.

In the morning, when the bath steward came, he edged his way into
the narrow cabin and poked his head into the berth over Bird's.
"I'm sorry, sir, I've made careful search for your luggage, and
it's not to be found, sir."

"I tell you it must be found," fumed a petulant voice overhead.
"I brought it over from the St. Regis myself in a taxi. I saw it
standing on the pier with the officers' luggage,--a black cabin
trunk with V.M. lettered on both ends. Get after it."

The steward smiled discreetly. He probably knew that the aviator
had come on board in a state which precluded any very accurate
observation on his part. "Very well, sir. Is there anything I can
get you for the present ?"

"You can take this shirt out and have it laundered and bring it
back to me tonight. I've no linen in my bag."

"Yes, sir."

Claude and Fanning got on deck as quickly as possible and found
scores of their comrades already there, pointing to dark smudges
of smoke along the clear horizon. They knew that these vessels
had come from unknown ports, some of them far away, steaming
thither under orders known only to their commanders. They would
all arrive within a few hours of each other at a given spot on
the surface of the ocean. There they would fall into place,
flanked by their destroyers, and would proceed in orderly
formation, without changing their relative positions. Their
escort would not leave them until they were joined by gunboats
and destroyers off whatever coast they were bound for,--what that
coast was, not even their own officers knew as yet.

Later in the morning this meeting was actually accomplished.
There were ten troop ships, some of them very large boats, and
six destroyers. The men stood about the whole morning, gazing
spellbound at their sister transports, trying to find out their
names, guessing at their capacity. Tanned as they already were,
their lips and noses began to blister under the fiery sunlight.
After long months of intensive training, the sudden drop into an
idle, soothing existence was grateful to them. Though their pasts
were neither long or varied, most of them, like Claude Wheeler,
felt a sense of relief at being rid of all they had ever been
before and facing something absolutely new. Said Tod Fanning, as
he lounged against the rail, "Whoever likes it can run for a
train every morning, and grind his days out in a Westinghouse
works; but not for me any more!"

The Virginian joined them. "That Englishman ain't got out of bed
yet. I reckon he's been liquouring up pretty steady. The place
smells like a bar. The room steward was just coming out, and he
winked at me. He was slipping something in his pocket, looked
like a banknote."

Claude was curious, and went down to the cabin. As he entered,
the air-man, lying half-dressed in his upper berth, raised
himself on one elbow and looked down at him. His blue eyes were
contracted and hard, his curly hair disordered, but his cheeks
were as pink as a girl's, and the little yellow humming-bird
moustache on his upper lip was twisted sharp.

"You're missing fine weather," said Claude affably.

"Oh, there'll be a great deal of weather before we get over, and
damned little of anything else!" He drew a bottle from under his
pillow. "Have a nip ?"

"I don't mind if I do," Claude put out his hand.

The other laughed and sank back on his pillow, drawling lazily,
"Brave boy! Go ahead; drink to the Kaiser."

"Why to him in particular ?"

"It's not particular. Drink to Hindenburg, or the High Command,
or anything else that got you out of the cornfield. That's where
they did get you, didn't they ?"

"Well, it's a good guess, anyhow. Where did they get you ?"

"Crystal Lake, Iowa. I think that was the place." He yawned and
folded his hands over his stomach.

"Why, we thought you were an Englishman."

"Not quite. I've served in His Majesty's army two years, though."

"Have you been flying in France ?"

"Yes. I've been back and forth all the time, England and France.
Now I've wasted two months at Fort Worth. Instructor. That's not
my line. I may have been sent over as a reprimand. You can't tell
about my Colonel, though; may have been his way of getting me out
of danger."

Claude glanced up at him, shocked at such an idea.

The young man in the berth smiled with listless compassion. "Oh,
I don't mean Bosch planes! There are dangers and dangers. You'll
find you got bloody little information about this war, where they
trained you. They don't communicate any details of importance.
Going ?"

Claude hadn't intended to, but at this suggestion he pulled back
the door.

"One moment," called the aviator. "Can't you keep that
long-legged ass who bunks under you quiet ?"

"Fanning ? He's a good kid. What's the matter with him ?"

"His general ignorance and his insufferably familiar tone,"
snapped the other as he turned over.

Claude found Fanning and the Virginian playing checkers, and told
them that the mysterious air-man was a fellow countryman. Both
seemed disappointed.

"Pshaw!" exclaimed Lieutenant Bird.

"He can't put on airs with me, after that," Fanning declared.
"Crystal Lake! Why it's no town at all!"

All the same, Claude wanted to find out how a youth from Crystal
Lake ever became a member of the Royal Flying Corps. Already,
from among the hundreds of strangers, half-a-dozen stood out as
men he was determined to know better. Taking them altogether the
men were a fine sight as they lounged about the decks in the
sunlight, the petty rivalries and jealousies of camp days
forgotten. Their youth seemed to flow together, like their brown
uniforms. Seen in the mass like this, Claude thought, they were
rather noble looking fellows. In so many of the faces there was a
look of fine candour, an expression of cheerful expectancy and
confident goodwill.

There was on board a solitary Marine, with the stripes of Border
service on his coat. He had been sick in the Navy Hospital in
Brooklyn when his regiment sailed, and was now going over to join
it. He was a young fellow, rather pale from his recent illness,
but he was exactly Claude's idea of what a soldier ought to look
like. His eye followed the Marine about all day.

The young man's name was Albert Usher, and he came from a little
town up in the Wind River mountains, in Wyoming, where he had
worked in a logging camp. He told Claude these facts when they
found themselves standing side by side that evening, watching the
broad purple sun go down into a violet coloured sea.

It was the hour when the farmers at home drive their teams in
after the day's work. Claude was thinking how his mother would be
standing at the west window every evening now, watching the sun
go down and following him in her mind. When the young Marine came
up and joined him, he confessed to a pang of homesickness.

"That's a kind of sickness I don't have to wrastle with," said
Albert Usher. "I was left an orphan on a lonesome ranch, when I
was nine, and I've looked out for myself ever since."

Claude glanced sidewise at the boy's handsome head, that came up
from his neck with clean, strong lines, and thought he had done a
pretty good job for himself. He could not have said exactly what
it was he liked about young Usher's face, but it seemed to him a
face that had gone through things,--that had been trained down
like his body, and had developed a definite character. What
Claude thought due to a manly, adventurous life, was really due
to well-shaped bones; Usher's face was more "modelled" than most
of the healthy countenances about him.

When questioned, the Marine went on to say that though he had no
home of his own, he had always happened to fall on his feet,
among kind people. He could go back to any house in Pinedale or
Du Bois and be welcomed like a son.

"I suppose there are kind women everywhere," he said, "but in
that respect Wyoming's got the rest of the world beat. I never
felt the lack of a home. Now the U. S. Marines are my family.
Wherever they are, I'm at home."

"Were you at Vera Cruz ?" Claude asked.

"I guess! We thought that was quite a little party at the time,
but I suppose it will seem small potatoes when we get over there.
I'm figuring on seeing some first-rate scrapping. How long have
you been in the army ?"

"Year ago last April. I've had hard luck about getting over. They
kept me jumping about to train men."

"Then yours is all to come. Are you a college graduate ?"

"No. I went away to school, but I didn't finish."

Usher frowned at the gilded path on the water where the sun lay
half submerged, like a big, watchful eye, closing. "I always
wanted to go to college, but I never managed it. A man in Laramie
offered to stake me to a course in the University there, but I
was too restless. I guess I was ashamed of my handwriting." He
paused as if he had run against some old regret. A moment later
he said suddenly, "Can you parlez-vous ?"

"No. I know a few words, but I can't put them together."

"Same here. I expect to pick up some. I pinched quite a little
Spanish down on the Border."

By this time the sun had disappeared, and all over the west the
yellow sky came down evenly, like a gold curtain, on the still
sea that seemed to have solidified into a slab of dark blue
stone,--not a twinkle on its immobile surface. Across its dusky
smoothness were two long smears of pale green, like a robin's
egg.

"Do you like the water ?" Usher asked, in the tone of a polite
host. "When I first shipped on a cruiser I was crazy about it. I
still am. But, you know, I like them old bald mountains back in
Wyoming, too. There's waterfalls you can see twenty miles off
from the plains; they look like white sheets or something,
hanging up there on the cliffs. And down in the pine woods, in
the cold streams, there's trout as long as my fore-arm."

That evening Claude was on deck, almost alone; there was a
concert down in the ward room. To the west heavy clouds had come
up, moving so low that they flapped over the water like a black
washing hanging on the line.

The music sounded well from below. Four Swedish boys from the
Scandinavian settlement at Lindsborg, Kansas, were singing "Long,
Long Ago." Claude listened from a sheltered spot in the stern.
What were they, and what was he, doing here on the Atlantic ? Two
years ago he had seemed a fellow for whom life was over; driven
into the ground like a post, or like those Chinese criminals who
are planted upright in the earth, with only their heads left out
for birds to peck at and insects to sting. All his comrades had
been tucked away in prairie towns, with their little jobs and
their little plans. Yet here they were, attended by unknown ships
called in from the four quarters of the earth. How had they come
to be worth the watchfulness and devotion of so many men and
machines, this extravagant consumption of fuel and energy ? Taken
one by one, they were ordinary fellows like himself. Yet here
they were. And in this massing and movement of men there was
nothing mean or common; he was sure of that. It was, from first
to last, unforeseen, almost incredible. Four years ago, when the
French were holding the Marne, the wisest men in the world had
not conceived of this as possible; they had reckoned with every
fortuity but this. "Out of these stones can my Father raise up
seed unto Abraham."

Downstairs the men began singing "Annie Laurie." Where were those
summer evenings when he used to sit dumb by the windmill,
wondering what to do with his life ?



IV

The morning of the third day; Claude and the Virginian and the
Marine were up very early, standing in the bow, watching the
Anchises mount the fresh blowing hills of water, her prow, as it
rose and fell, always a dull triangle against the glitter. Their
escorts looked like dream ships, soft and iridescent as shell in
the pearl-coloured tints of the morning. Only the dark smudges of
smoke told that they were mechanical realities with stokers and
engines.

While the three stood there, a sergeant brought Claude word that
two of his men would have to report at sick-call. Corporal
Tannhauser had had such an attack of nose-bleed during the night
that the sergeant thought he might die before they got it
stopped. Tannhauser was up now, and in the breakfast line, but
the sergeant was sure he ought not to be. This Fritz Tannhauser
was the tallest man in the company, a German-American boy who,
when asked his name, usually said that his name was Dennis and
that he was of Irish descent. Even this morning he tried to joke,
and pointing to his big red face told Claude he thought he had
measles. "Only they ain't German measles, Lieutenant," he
insisted.

Medical inspection took a long while that morning. There seemed
to be an outbreak of sickness on board. When Claude brought his
two men up to the Doctor, he told them to go below and get into
bed. As they left he turned to Claude.

"Give them hot tea, and pile army blankets on them. Make them
sweat if you can." Claude remarked that the hold wasn't a very
cheerful place for sick men.

"I know that, Lieutenant, but there are a number of sick men this
morning, and the only other physician on board is the sickest of
the lot. There's the ship's doctor, of course, but he's only
responsible for the crew, and so far he doesn't seem interested.
I've got to overhaul the hospital and the medical stores this
morning."

"Is there an epidemic of some sort ?"

"Well, I hope not. But I'll have plenty to do today, so I count
on you to look after those two." The doctor was a New Englander
who had joined them at Hoboken. He was a brisk, trim man, with
piercing eyes, clean-cut features, and grey hair just the colour
of his pale face. Claude felt at once that he knew his business,
and he went below to carry out instructions as well as he could.

When he came up from the hold, he saw the aviator--whose name, he
had learned, was Victor Morse--smoking by the rail. This
cabin-mate still piqued his curiosity.

"First time you've been up, isn't it ?"

The aviator was looking at the distant smoke plumes over the
quivering, bright water. "Time enough. I wish I knew where we are
heading for. It will be awfully awkward for me if we make a
French port."

"I thought you said you were to report in France."

"I am. But I want to report in London first." He continued to
gaze off at the painted ships. Claude noticed that in standing he
held his chin very high. His eyes, now that he was quite sober,
were brilliantly young and daring; they seemed scornful of things
about him. He held himself conspicuously apart, as if he were not
among his own kind.

Claude had seen a captured crane, tied by its leg to a hencoop,
behave exactly like that among Mahailey's chickens; hold its
wings to its sides, and move its head about quickly and glare.

"I suppose you have friends in London ?" he asked.

"Rather!" the aviator replied with feeling.

"Do you like it better than Paris ?"

"I shouldn't imagine anything was much better than London. I've
not been in Paris; always went home when I was on leave. They
work us pretty hard. In the infantry and artillery our men get
only a fortnight off in twelve months. I understand the Americans
have leased the Riviera,--recuperate at Nice and Monte Carlo. The
only Cook's tour we had was Gallipoli," he added grimly.

Victor had gone a good way toward acquiring an English accent,
the boys thought. At least he said 'necess'ry' and 'dysent'ry'
and called his suspenders 'braces'. He offered Claude a
cigarette, remarking that his cigars were in his lost trunk.

"Take one of mine. My brother sent me two boxes just before we
sailed. I'll put a box in your bunk next time I go down. They're
good ones."

The young man turned and looked him over with surprise. "I say,
that's very decent of you! Yes, thank you, I will."

Claude had tried yesterday, when he lent Victor some shirts, to
make him talk about his aerial adventures, but upon that subject
he was as close as a clam. He admitted that the long red scar on
his upper arm had been drilled by a sharpshooter from a German
Fokker, but added hurriedly that it was of no consequence, as he
had made a good landing. Now, on the strength of the cigars,
Claude thought he would probe a little further. He asked whether
there was anything in the lost trunk that couldn't be replaced,
anything "valuable."

"There's one thing that's positively invaluable; a Zeiss lens, in
perfect condition. I've got several good photographic outfits
from time to time, but the lenses are always cracked by
heat,--the things usually come down on fire. This one I got out
of a plane I brought down up at Bar-le-Duc, and there's not a
scratch on it; simply a miracle."

"You get all the loot when you bring down a machine, do you ?"
Claude asked encouragingly.

"Of course. I've a good collection; altimeters and compasses and
glasses. This lens I always carry with me, because I'm afraid to
leave it anywhere."

"I suppose it makes a fellow feel pretty fine to bring down one
of those German planes."

"Sometimes. I brought down one too many, though; it was very
unpleasant." Victor paused, frowning. But Claude's open,
credulous face was too much for his reserve. "I brought down a
woman once. She was a plucky devil, flew a scouting machine and
had bothered us a bit, going over our lines. Naturally, we didn't
know it was a woman until she came down. She was crushed
underneath things. She lived a few hours and dictated a letter to
her people. I went out and dropped it inside their lines. It was
nasty business. I was quite knocked out. I got a fortnight's
leave in London, though. Wheeler," he broke out suddenly, "I wish
I knew we were going there now!"

"I'd like it well enough if we were."

Victor shrugged. "I should hope so!" He turned his chin in
Claude's direction. "See here, if you like, I'll show you London!
It's a promise. Americans never see it, you know. They sit in a
Y. hut and write to their Pollyannas, or they go round hunting for
the Tower. I'll show you a city that's alive; that is, unless
you've a preference for museums."

His listener laughed. "No, I want to see life, as they say."

"Umph! I'd like to set you down in some places I can think of.
Very well, I invite you to dine with me at the Savoy, the first
night we're in London. The curtain will rise on this world for
you. Nobody admitted who isn't in evening dress. The jewels will
dazzle you. Actresses, duchesses, all the handsomest women in
Europe."

"But I thought London was dark and gloomy since the war."

Victor smiled and teased his small straw-coloured moustache with
his thumb and middle finger. "There are a few bright spots left,
thank you!" He began to explain to a novice what life at the
front was really like. Nobody who had seen service talked about
the war, or thought about it; it was merely a condition under
which they lived. Men talked about the particular regiment they
were jealous of, or the favoured division that was put in for all
the show fighting. Everybody thought about his own game, his
personal life that he managed to keep going in spite of
discipline; his next leave, how to get champagne without paying
for it, dodging the guard, getting into scrapes with women and
getting out again. "Are you quick with your French ?" he asked.

Claude grinned. "Not especially."

"You'd better brush up on it if you want to do anything with
French girls. I hear your M.P.'s are very strict. You must be
able to toss the word the minute you see a skirt, and make your
date before the guard gets onto you."

"I suppose French girls haven't any scruples ?" Claude remarked
carelessly.

Victor shrugged his narrow shoulders. "I haven't found that girls
have many, anywhere. When we Canadians were training in England,
we all had our week-end wives. I believe the girls in Crystal
Lake used to be more or less fussy,--but that's long ago and far
away. You won't have any difficulty."

When Victor was in the middle of a tale of amorous adventure, a
little different from any Claude had ever heard, Tod Fanning
joined them. The aviator did not acknowledge the presence of a
new listener, but when he had finished his story, walked away
with his special swagger, his eyes fixed upon the distance.

Fanning looked after him with disgust. "Do you believe him ? I
don't think he's any such heart-smasher. I like his nerve,
calling you `Leftenant'! When he speaks to me he'll have to say
Lootenant, or I'll spoil his beauty."

That day the men remembered long afterward, for it was the end of
the fine weather, and of those first long, carefree days at sea.
In the afternoon Claude and the young Marine, the Virginian and
Fanning, sat together in the sun watching the water scoop itself
out in hollows and pile itself up in blue, rolling hills. Usher
was telling his companions a long story about the landing of the
Marines at Vera Cruz.

"It's a great old town," he concluded. "One thing there I'll
never forget. Some of the natives took a few of us out to the old
prison that stands on a rock in the sea. We put in the whole day
there, and it wasn't any tourist show, believe me! We went down
into dungeons underneath the water where they used to keep State
prisoners, kept them buried alive for years. We saw all the old
instruments of torture; rusty iron cages where a man couldn't lie
down or stand up, but had to sit bent over till he grew crooked.
It made you feel queer when you came up, to think how people had
been left to rot away down there, when there was so much sun and
water outside. Seems like something used to be the matter with
the world." He said no more, but Claude thought from his serious
look that he believed he and his countrymen who were pouring
overseas would help to change all that.



V

That night the Virginian, who berthed under Victor Morse, had an
alarming attack of nose-bleed, and by morning he was so weak that
he had to be carried to the hospital. The Doctor said they might
as well face the facts; a scourge of influenza had broken out on
board, of a peculiarly bloody and malignant type.* Everybody was
a little frightened. Some of the officers shut themselves up in
the smoking-room, and drank whiskey and soda and played poker all
day, as if they could keep contagion out.

* The actual outbreak of influenza on transports carrying United
States troops is here anticipated by several months.


Lieutenant Bird died late in the afternoon and was buried at
sunrise the next day, sewed up in a tarpaulin, with an eighteen
pound shell at his feet. The morning broke brilliantly clear and
bitter cold. The sea was rolling blue walls of water, and the
boat was raked by a wind as sharp as ice. Excepting those who
were sick, the boys turned out to a man. It was the first burial
at sea they had ever witnessed, and they couldn't help finding it
interesting. The Chaplain read the burial service while they
stood with uncovered heads. The Kansas band played a solemn
march, the Swedish quartette sang a hymn. Many a man turned his
face away when that brown sack was lowered into the cold, leaping
indigo ridges that seemed so destitute of anything friendly to
human kind. In a moment it was done, and they steamed on without
him.

The glittering walls of water kept rolling in, indigo, purple,
more brilliant than on the days of mild weather. The blinding
sunlight did not temper the cold, which cut the face and made the
lungs ache. Landsmen began to have that miserable sense of being
where they were never meant to be. The boys lay in heaps on the
deck, trying to keep warm by hugging each other close. Everybody
was seasick. Fanning went to bed with his clothes on, so sick he
couldn't take off his boots. Claude lay in the crowded stern, too
cold, too faint to move. The sun poured over them like flame,
without any comfort in it. The strong, curling, foam-crested
waves threw off the light like millions of mirrors, and their
colour was almost more than the eye could bear. The water seemed
denser than before, heavy like melted glass, and the foam on the
edges of each blue ridge looked sharp as crystals. If a man
should fall into them, he would be cut to pieces.

The whole ocean seemed suddenly to have come to life, the waves
had a malignant, graceful, muscular energy, were animated by a
kind of mocking cruelty. Only a few hours ago a gentle boy had
been thrown into that freezing water and forgotten. Yes, already
forgotten; every one had his own miseries to think about.

Late in the afternoon the wind fell, and there was a sinister
sunset. Across the red west a small, ragged black cloud
hurried,--then another, and another. They came up out of the
sea,--wild, witchlike shapes that travelled fast and met in the
west as if summoned for an evil conclave. They hung there against
the afterglow, distinct black shapes, drawing together, devising
something. The few men who were left on deck felt that no good
could come out of a sky like that. They wished they were at home,
in France, anywhere but here.



VI

The next morning Doctor Trueman asked Claude to help him at sick
call. "I've got a bunch of sergeants taking temperatures, but
it's too much for one man to oversee. I don't want to ask
anything of those dude officers who sit in there playing poker
all the time. Either they've got no conscience, or they're not
awake to the gravity of the situation."

The Doctor stood on deck in his raincoat, his foot on the rail to
keep his equilibrium, writing on his knee as the long string of
men came up to him. There were more than seventy in the line that
morning, and some of them looked as if they ought to be in a
drier place. Rain beat down on the sea like lead bullets. The old
Anchises floundered from one grey ridge to another, quite alone.
Fog cut off the cheering sight of the sister ships. The doctor
had to leave his post from time to time, when seasickness got the
better of his will. Claude, at his elbow, was noting down names
and temperatures. In the middle of his work he told the sergeants
to manage without him for a few minutes. Down near the end of the
line he had seen one of his own men misconducting himself,
snivelling and crying like a baby,--a fine husky boy of eighteen
who had never given any trouble. Claude made a dash for him and
clapped him on the shoulder.

"If you can't stop that, Bert Fuller, get where you won't be
seen. I don't want all these English stewards standing around to
watch an American soldier cry. I never heard of such a thing!"

"I can't help it, Lieutenant," the boy blubbered. "I've kept it
back just as long as I can. I can't hold in any longer!"

"What's the matter with you ? Come over here and sit down on this
box and tell me."

Private Fuller willingly let himself be led, and dropped on the
box. "I'm so sick, Lieutenant!"

"I'll see how sick you are." Claude stuck a thermometer into his
mouth, and while he waited, sent the deck steward to bring a cup
of tea. "Just as I thought, Fuller. You've not half a degree of
fever. You're scared, and that's all. Now drink this tea. I
expect you didn't eat any breakfast."

"No, sir. I can't eat the awful stuff on this boat."

"It is pretty bad. Where are you from ?"

"I'm from P-P-Pleasantville, up on the P-P-Platte," the boy
gulped, and his tears began to flow afresh.

"Well, now, what would they think of you, back there ? I suppose
they got the band out and made a fuss over you when you went
away, and thought they were sending off a fine soldier. And I've
always thought you'd be a first rate soldier. I guess we'll forget
about this. You feel better already, don't you ?"

"Yes, sir. This tastes awful good. I've been so sick to my
stomach, and last night I got pains in my chest. All my crowd is
sick, and you took big Tannhauser, I mean Corporal, away to the
hospital. It looks like we're all going to die out here."

"I know it's a little gloomy. But don't you shame me before these
English stewards."

"I won't do it again, sir," he promised.

When the medical inspection was over, Claude took the Doctor down
to see Fanning, who had been coughing and wheezing all night and
hadn't got out of his berth. The examination was short. The
Doctor knew what was the matter before he put the stethoscope on
him. "It's pneumonia, both lungs," he said when they came out
into the corridor. "I have one case in the hospital that will die
before morning."

"What can you do for him, Doctor ?"

"You see how I'm fixed; close onto two hundred men sick, and one
doctor. The medical supplies are wholly inadequate. There's not
castor oil enough on this boat to keep the men clean inside. I'm
using my own drugs, but they won't last through an epidemic like
this. I can't do much for Lieutenant Fanning. You can, though, if
you'll give him the time. You can take better care of him right
here than he could get in the hospital. We haven't an empty bed
there."

Claude found Victor Morse and told him he had better get a berth
in one of the other staterooms. When Victor left with his
belongings, Fanning stared after him. "Is he going ?"

"Yes. It's too crowded in here, if you've got to stay in bed."

"Glad of it. His stories are too raw for me. I'm no sissy, but
that fellow's a regular Don Quixote."

Claude laughed. "You mustn't talk. It makes you cough."

"Where's the Virginian ?"

"Who, Bird ?" Claude asked in astonishment,--Fanning had stood
beside him at Bird's funeral. "Oh, he's gone, too. You sleep if
you can."

After dinner Doctor Trueman came in and showed Claude how to give
his patient an alcohol bath. "It's simply a question of whether
you can keep up his strength. Don't try any of this greasy food
they serve here. Give him a raw egg beaten up in the juice of an
orange every two hours, night and day. Waken him out of his sleep
when it's time, don't miss a single two-hour period. I'll write
an order to your table steward, and you can beat the eggs up here
in your cabin. Now I must go to the hospital. It's wonderful what
those band boys are doing there. I begin to take some pride in
the place. That big German has been asking for you. He's in a
very bad way."

As there were no nurses on board, the Kansas band had taken over
the hospital. They had been trained for stretcher and first aid
work, and when they realized what was happening on the Anchises,
the bandmaster came to the Doctor and offered the services of his
men. He chose nurses and orderlies, divided them into night and
day shifts.

When Claude went to see his Corporal, big Tannhauser did not
recognize him. He was quite out of his head and was conversing
with his own family in the language of his early childhood. The
Kansas boys had singled him out for special attention. The mere
fact that he kept talking in a tongue forbidden on the surface of
the seas, made him seem more friendless and alone than the
others.

From the hospital Claude went down into the hold where
half-a-dozen of his company were lying ill. The hold was damp and
musty as an old cellar, so steeped in the smells and leakage of
innumerable dirty cargoes that it could not be made or kept
clean. There was almost no ventilation, and the air was fetid
with sickness and sweat and vomit. Two of the band boys were
working in the stench and dirt, helping the stewards. Claude
stayed to lend a hand until it was time to give Fanning his
nourishment. He began to see that the wrist watch, which he had
hitherto despised as effeminate and had carried in his pocket,
might be a very useful article. After he had made Fanning swallow
his egg, he piled all the available blankets on him and opened
the port to give the cabin an airing. While the fresh wind blew
in, he sat down on the edge of his berth and tried to collect his
wits. What had become of those first days of golden weather,
leisure and good-comradeship ? The band concerts, the Lindsborg
Quartette, the first excitement and novelty of being at sea: all
that had gone by like a dream.

That night when the Doctor came in to see Fanning, he threw his
stethoscope on the bed and said wearily, "It's a wonder that
instrument doesn't take root in my ears and grow there." He sat
down and sucked his thermometer for a few minutes, then held it
out for inspection. Claude looked at it and told him he ought to
go to bed.

"Then who's to be up and around ? No bed for me, tonight. But I
will have a hot bath by and by."

Claude asked why the ship's doctor didn't do anything and added
that he must be as little as he looked.

"Chessup ? No, he's not half bad when you get to know him. He's
given me a lot of help about preparing medicines, and it's a
great assistance to talk the cases over with him. He'll do
anything for me except directly handle the patients. He doesn't
want to exceed his authority. It seems the English marine is very
particular about such things. He's a Canadian, and he graduated
first in his class at Edinburgh. I gather he was frozen out in
private practice. You see, his appearance is against him. It's an
awful handicap to look like a kid and be as shy as he is."

The Doctor rose, shored up his shoulders and took his bag.
"You're looking fine yourself, Lieutenant," he remarked.

"Parents both living ? Were they quite young when you were born ?
Well, then their parents were, probably. I'm a crank about that.
Yes, I'll get my bath pretty soon, and I will lie down for an
hour or two. With those splendid band boys running the hospital,
I get a little lee-way."

Claude wondered how the Doctor kept going. He knew he hadn't had
more than four hours sleep out of the last forty-eight, and he
was not a man of rugged constitution. His bath steward was, as he
said, his comfort. Hawkins was an old fellow who had held better
positions on better boats,--yes, in better times, too. He had
first gone to sea as a bath steward, and now, through the
fortunes of war, he had come back where he began,--not a good
place for an old man. His back was bent meekly, and he shuffled
along with broken arches. He looked after the comfort of all the
officers, and attended the doctor like a valet; got out his clean
linen, persuaded him to lie down and have a hot drink after his
bath, stood on guard at his door to take messages for him in the
short hours when he was resting. Hawkins had lost two sons in the
war and he seemed to find a solemn consolation in being of
service to soldiers. "Take it a bit easy now, sir. You'll 'ave it
'ard enough over there," he used to say to one and another.

At eleven o'clock one of the Kansas men came to tell Claude that
his Corporal was going fast. Big Tannhauser's fever had left him,
but so had everything else. He lay in a stupor. His congested
eyeballs were rolled back in his head and only the yellowish
whites were visible. His mouth was open and his tongue hung out
at one side. From the end of the corridor Claude had heard the
frightful sounds that came from his throat, sounds like violent
vomiting, or the choking rattle of a man in strangulation,--and,
indeed, he was being strangled. One of the band boys brought
Claude a camp chair, and said kindly, "He doesn't suffer. It's
mechanical now. He'd go easier if he hadn't so much vitality. The
Doctor says he may have a few moments of consciousness just at
the last, if you want to stay."

"I'll go down and give my private patient his egg, and then I'll
come back." Claude went away and returned, and sat dozing by the
bed. After three o'clock the noise of struggle ceased; instantly
the huge figure on the bed became again his good-natured
corporal. The mouth closed, the glassy jellies were once more
seeing, intelligent human eyes. The face lost its swollen,
brutish look and was again the face of a friend. It was almost
unbelievable that anything so far gone could come back. He looked
up wistfully at his Lieutenant as if to ask him something. His
eyes filled with tears, and he turned his head away a little.

"Mein' arme Mutter!" he whispered distinctly.

A few moments later he died in perfect dignity, not struggling
under torture, but consciously, it seemed to Claude,--like a
brave boy giving back what was not his to keep.

Claude returned to his cabin, roused Fanning once more, and then
threw himself upon his tipping bunk. The boat seemed to wallow
and sprawl in the waves, as he had seen animals do on the farm
when they gave birth to young. How helpless the old vessel was
out here in the pounding seas, and how much misery she carried!
He lay looking up at the rusty water pipes and unpainted
joinings. This liner was in truth the "Old Anchises"; even the
carpenters who made her over for the service had not thought her
worth the trouble, and had done their worst by her. The new
partitions were hung to the joists by a few nails.

Big Tannhauser had been one of those who were most anxious to
sail. He used to grin and say, "France is the only climate that's
healthy for a man with a name like mine." He had waved his
good-bye to the image in the New York harbour with the rest,
believed in her like the rest. He only wanted to serve. It seemed
hard.

When Tannhauser first came to camp he was confused all the time,
and couldn't remember instructions. Claude had once stepped him
out in front of the line and reprimanded him for not knowing his
right side from his left. When he looked into the case, he found
that the fellow was not eating anything, that he was ill from
homesickness. He was one of those farmer boys who are afraid of
town. The giant baby of a long family, he had never slept away
from home a night in his life before he enlisted.

Corporal Tannhauser, along with four others, was buried at
sunrise. No band this time; the chaplain was ill, so one of the
young captains read the service. Claude stood by watching until
the sailors shot one sack, longer by half a foot than the other
four, into a lead-coloured chasm in the sea. There was not even a
splash. After breakfast one of the Kansas orderlies called him
into a little cabin where they had prepared the dead men for
burial. The Army regulations minutely defined what was to be done
with a deceased soldier's effects. His uniform, shoes, blankets,
arms, personal baggage, were all disposed of according to
instructions. But in each case there was a residue; the dead
man's toothbrushes, his razors, and the photographs he carried
upon his person. There they were in five pathetic little heaps;
what should be done with them ?

Claude took up the photographs that had belonged to his corporal;
one was a fat, foolish-looking girl in a white dress that was too
tight for her, and a floppy hat, a little flag pinned on her
plump bosom. The other was an old woman, seated, her hands
crossed in her lap. Her thin hair was drawn back tight from a
hard, angular face--unmistakably an Old-World face--and her eyes
squinted at the camera. She looked honest and stubborn and
unconvinced, he thought, as if she did not in the least
understand.

"I'll take these," he said. "And the others--just pitch them
over, don't you think ?"



VII

B Company's first officer, Captain Maxey, was so seasick
throughout the voyage that he was of no help to his men in the
epidemic. It must have been a frightful blow to his pride, for
nobody was ever more anxious to do an officer's whole duty.

Claude had known Harris Maxey slightly in Lincoln; had met him at
the Erlichs' and afterward kept up a campus acquaintance with
him. He hadn't liked Maxey then, and he didn't like him now, but
he thought him a good officer. Maxey's family were poor folk from
Mississippi, who had settled in Nemaha county, and he was very
ambitious, not only to get on in the world, but, as he said, to
"be somebody." His life at the University was a feverish pursuit
of social advantages and useful acquaintances. His feeling for
the "right people" amounted to veneration. After his graduation,
Maxey served on the Mexican Border. He was a tireless drill
master, and threw himself into his duties with all the energy of
which his frail physique was capable. He was slight and
fair-skinned; a rigid jaw threw his lower teeth out beyond the
upper ones and made his face look stiff. His whole manner, tense
and nervous, was the expression of a passionate desire to excel.

Claude seemed to himself to be leading a double life these days.
When he was working over Fanning, or was down in the hold helping
to take care of the sick soldiers, he had no time to think,--did
mechanically the next thing that came to hand. But when he had an
hour to himself on deck, the tingling sense of ever-widening
freedom flashed up in him again. The weather was a continual
adventure; he had never known any like it before. The fog, and
rain, the grey sky and the lonely grey stretches of the ocean
were like something he had imagined long ago--memories of old sea
stories read in childhood, perhaps--and they kindled a warm spot
in his heart. Here on the Anchises he seemed to begin where
childhood had left off. The ugly hiatus between had closed up.
Years of his life were blotted out in the fog. This fog which had
been at first depressing had become a shelter; a tent moving
through space, hiding one from all that had been before, giving
one a chance to correct one's ideas about life and to plan the
future. The past was physically shut off; that was his illusion.
He had already travelled a great many more miles than were told
off by the ship's log. When Bandmaster Fred Max asked him to play
chess, he had to stop a moment and think why it was that game had
such disagreeable associations for him. Enid's pale, deceptive
face seldom rose before him unless some such accident brought it
up. If he happened to come upon a group of boys talking about
their sweethearts and war-brides, he listened a moment and then
moved away with the happy feeling that he was the least married
man on the boat.

There was plenty of deck room, now that so many men were ill
either from seasickness or the epidemic, and sometimes he and
Albert Usher had the stormy side of the boat almost to
themselves. The Marine was the best sort of companion for these
gloomy days; steady, quiet, self-reliant. And he, too, was always
looking forward. As for Victor Morse, Claude was growing
positively fond of him. Victor had tea in a special corner of the
officers' smoking-room every afternoon--he would have perished
without it--and the steward always produced some special
garnishes of toast and jam or sweet biscuit for him. Claude
usually managed to join him at that hour.

On the day of Tannhauser's funeral he went into the smoking-room
at four. Victor beckoned the steward and told him to bring a
couple of hot whiskeys with the tea. "You're very wet, you know,
Wheeler, and you really should. There," he said as he put down
his glass, "don't you feel better with a drink ?"

"Very much. I think I'll have another. It's agreeable to be warm
inside."

"Two more, steward, and bring me some fresh lemon." The occupants
of the room were either reading or talking in low tones. One of
the Swedish boys was playing softly on the old piano. Victor
began to pour the tea. He had a neat way of doing it, and today
he was especially solicitous. "This Scotch mist gets into one's
bones, doesn't it ? I thought you were looking rather seedy when I
passed you on deck."

"I was up with Tannhauser last night. Didn't get more than an
hour's sleep," Claude murmured, yawning.

"Yes, I heard you lost your big corporal. I'm sorry. I've had bad
news, too. It's out now that we're to make a French port. That
dashes all my plans. However, c'est la guerre!" He pushed back
his cup with a shrug. "Take a turn outside ?"

Claude had often wondered why Victor liked him, since he was so
little Victor's kind. "If it isn't a secret," he said, "I'd like
to know how you ever got into the British army, anyway."

As they walked up and down in the rain, Victor told his story
briefly. When he had finished High School, he had gone into his
father's bank at Crystal Lake as bookkeeper. After banking hours
he skated, played tennis, or worked in the strawberry-bed,
according to the season. He bought two pairs of white pants every
summer and ordered his shirts from Chicago and thought he was a
swell, he said. He got himself engaged to the preacher's
daughter. Two years ago, the summer he was twenty, his father
wanted him to see Niagara Falls; so he wrote a modest check,
warned his son against saloons--Victor had never been inside
one--against expensive hotels and women who came up to ask the
time without an introduction, and sent him off, telling him it
wasn't necessary to fee porters or waiters. At Niagara Falls,
Victor fell in with some young Canadian officers who opened his
eyes to a great many things. He went over to Toronto with them.
Enlistment was going strong, and he saw an avenue of escape from
the bank and the strawberry bed. The air force seemed the most
brilliant and attractive branch of the service. They accepted
him, and here he was.

"You'll never go home again," Claude said with conviction. "I
don't see you settling down in any little Iowa town."

"In the air service," said Victor carelessly, "we don't concern
ourselves about the future. It's not worth while." He took out a
dull gold cigarette case which Claude had noticed before.

"Let me see that a minute, will you ? I've often admired it. A
present from somebody you like, isn't it ?"

A twitch of feeling, something quite genuine, passed over the
air-man's boyish face, and his rather small red mouth compressed
sharply. "Yes, a woman I want you to meet. Here," twitching his
chin over his high collar, "I'll write Maisie's address on my
card: `Introducing Lieutenant Wheeler, A.E.F.' That's all you'll
need. If you should get to London before I do, don't hesitate.
Call on her at once. Present this card, and she'll receive you."

Claude thanked him and put the card in his pocketbook, while
Victor lit a cigarette. "I haven't forgotten that you're dining
with us at the Savoy, if we happen in London together. If I'm
there, you can always find me. Her address is mine. It will
really be a great thing for you to meet a woman like Maisie.
She'll be nice to you, because you're my friend." He went on to
say that she had done everything in the world for him; had left
her husband and given up her friends on his account. She now had
a studio flat in Chelsea, where she simply waited his coming and
dreaded his going. It was an awful life for her. She entertained
other officers, of course, old acquaintances; but it was all
camouflage. He was the man.

Victor went so far as to produce her picture, and Claude gazed
without knowing what to say at a large moon-shaped face with
heavy-lidded, weary eyes,--the neck clasped by a pearl collar,
the shoulders bare to the matronly swell of the bosom. There was
not a line or wrinkle in that smooth expanse of flesh, but from
the heavy mouth and chin, from the very shape of the face, it was
easy to see that she was quite old enough to be Victor's mother.
Across the photograph was written in a large splashy hand, 'A
mon aigle!' Had Victor been delicate enough to leave him in any
doubt, Claude would have preferred to believe that his relations
with this lady were wholly of a filial nature.

"Women like her simply don't exist in your part of the world,"
the aviator murmured, as he snapped the photograph case. "She's a
linguist and musician and all that. With her, every-day living is
a fine art. Life, as she says, is what one makes it. In itself,
it's nothing. Where you came from it's nothing--a sleeping
sickness."

Claude laughed. "I don't know that I agree with you, but I like
to hear you talk."

"Well; in that part of France that's all shot to pieces, you'll
find more life going on in the cellars than in your home town,
wherever that is. I'd rather be a stevedore in the London docks
than a banker-king in one of your prairie States. In London, if
you're lucky enough to have a shilling, you can get something for
it."

"Yes, things are pretty tame at home," the other admitted.

"Tame ? My God, it's death in life! What's left of men if you take
all the fire out of them ? They're afraid of everything. I know
them; Sunday-school sneaks, prowling around those little towns
after dark!" Victor abruptly dismissed the subject. "By the way,
you're pals with the doctor, aren't you ? I'm needing some
medicine that is somewhere in my lost trunk. Would you mind
asking him if he can put up this prescription ? I don't want to go
to him myself. All these medicos blab, and he might report me.
I've been lucky dodging medical inspections. You see, I don't
want to get held up anywhere. Tell him it's not for you, of
course."

When Claude presented the piece of blue paper to Doctor Trueman,
he smiled contemptuously. "I see; this has been filled by a
London chemist. No, we have nothing of this sort." He handed it
back. "Those things are only palliatives. If your friend wants
that, he needs treatment,--and he knows where he can get it."

Claude returned the slip of paper to Victor as they left the
dining-room after supper, telling him he hadn't been able to get
any.

"Sorry," said Victor, flushing haughtily. "Thank you so much!"



VIII

Tod Fanning held out better than many of the stronger men; his
vitality surprised the doctor. The death list was steadily
growing; and the worst of it was that patients died who were not
very sick. Vigorous, clean-blooded young fellows of nineteen and
twenty turned over and died because they had lost their courage,
because other people were dying,--because death was in the air.
The corridors of the vessel had the smell of death about them.
Doctor Trueman said it was always so in an epidemic; patients
died who, had they been isolated cases, would have recovered.

"Do you know, Wheeler," the doctor remarked one day when they
came up from the hospital together to get a breath of air, "I
sometimes wonder whether all these inoculations they've been
having, against typhoid and smallpox and whatnot, haven't lowered
their vitality. I'll go off my head if I keep losing men! What
would you give to be out of it all, and safe back on the farm ?"
Hearing no reply, he turned his head, peered over his raincoat
collar, and saw a startled, resisting look in the young man's
blue eyes, followed by a quick flush.

"You don't want to be back on the farm, do you! Not a little bit!
Well, well; that's what it is to be young!" He shook his head
with a smile which might have been commiseration, might have been
envy, and went back to his duties.

Claude stayed where he was, drawing the wet grey air into his
lungs and feeling vexed and reprimanded. It was quite true, he
realized; the doctor had caught him. He was enjoying himself all
the while and didn't want to be safe anywhere. He was sorry about
Tannhauser and the others, but he was not sorry for himself. The
discomforts and misfortunes of this voyage had not spoiled it for
him. He grumbled, of course, because others did. But life had
never seemed so tempting as it did here and now. He could come up
from heavy work in the hospital, or from poor Fanning and his
everlasting eggs, and forget all that in ten minutes. Something
inside him, as elastic as the grey ridges over which they were
tipping, kept bounding up and saying: "I am all here. I've left
everything behind me. I am going over."

Only on that one day, the cold day of the Virginian's funeral,
when he was seasick, had he been really miserable. He must be
heartless, certainly, not to be overwhelmed by the sufferings of
his own men, his own friends--but he wasn't. He had them on his
mind and did all he could for them, but it seemed to him just now
that he took a sort of satisfaction in that, too, and was
somewhat vain of his usefulness to Doctor Trueman. A nice
attitude! He awoke every morning with that sense of freedom and
going forward, as if the world were growing bigger each day and
he were growing with it. Other fellows were sick and dying, and
that was terrible,--but he and the boat went on, and always on.

Something was released that had been struggling for a long while,
he told himself. He had been due in France since the first battle
of the Marne; he had followed false leads and lost precious time
and seen misery enough, but he was on the right road at last, and
nothing could stop him. If he hadn't been so green, so bashful,
so afraid of showing what he felt, and so stupid at finding his
way about, he would have enlisted in Canada, like Victor, or run
away to France and joined the Foreign Legion. All that seemed
perfectly possible now. Why hadn't he ?

Well, that was not "the Wheelers' way." The Wheelers were
terribly afraid of poking themselves in where they weren't
wanted, of pushing their way into a crowd where they didn't
belong. And they were even more afraid of doing anything that
might look affected or "romantic." They couldn't let themselves
adopt a conspicuous, much less a picturesque course of action,
unless it was all in the day's work. Well, History had
condescended to such as he; this whole brilliant adventure had
become the day's work. He had got into it after all, along with
Victor and the Marine and other fellows who had more imagination
and self-confidence in the first place. Three years ago he used
to sit moping by the windmill because he didn't see how a
Nebraska farmer boy had any "call," or, indeed, any way, to throw
himself into the struggle in France. He used enviously to read
about Alan Seeger and those fortunate American boys who had a
right to fight for a civilization they knew.

But the miracle had happened; a miracle so wide in its amplitude
that the Wheelers,--all the Wheelers and the roughnecks and the
low-brows were caught up in it. Yes, it was the rough-necks' own
miracle, all this; it was their golden chance. He was in on it,
and nothing could hinder or discourage him unless he were put
over the side himself--which was only a way of joking, for that
was a possibility he never seriously considered. The feeling of
purpose, of fateful purpose, was strong in his breast.



IX

"Look at this, Doctor!" Claude caught Dr. Trueman on his way from
breakfast and handed him a written notice, signed D. T. Micks,
Chief Steward. It stated that no more eggs or oranges could be
furnished to patients, as the supply was exhausted.

The doctor squinted at the paper. "I'm afraid that's your
patient's death warrant. You'll never be able to keep him going
on anything else. Why don't you go and talk it over with Chessup ?
He's a resourceful fellow. I'll join you there in a few minutes."

Claude had often been to Dr. Chessup's cabin since the epidemic
broke out,-rather liked to wait there when he went for medicines
or advice. It was a comfortable, personal sort of place with
cheerful chintz hangings. The walls were lined with books, held
in place by sliding wooden slats, padlocked at the ends. There
were a great many scientific works in German and English; the
rest were French novels in paper covers. This morning he found
Chessup weighing out white powders at his desk. In the rack over
his bunk was the book with which he had read himself to sleep
last night; the title, "Un Crime d'Amour," lettered in black on
yellow, caught Claude's eye. The doctor put on his coat and
pointed his visitor to the jointed chair in which patients were
sometimes examined. Claude explained his predicament.

The ship's doctor was a strange fellow to come from Canada, the
land of big men and rough. He looked like a schoolboy, with small
hands and feet and a pink complexion. On his left cheekbone was a
large brown mole, covered with silky hair, and for some reason
that seemed to make his face effeminate. It was easy to see why
he had not been successful in private practice. He was like
somebody trying to protect a raw surface from heat and cold; so
cursed with diffidence, and so sensitive about his boyish
appearance that he chose to shut himself up in an oscillating
wooden coop on the sea. The long run to Australia had exactly
suited him. A rough life and the pounding of bad weather had
fewer terrors for him than an office in town, with constant
exposure to human personalities.

"Have you tried him on malted milk ?" he asked, when Claude had
told him how Farming's nourishment was threatened.

"Dr. Trueman hasn't a bottle left. How long do you figure we'll
be at sea ?"

"Four days; possibly five."

"Then Lieutenant Wheeler will lose his pal," said Dr. Trueman,
who had just come in.

Chessup stood for a moment frowning and pulling nervously at the
brass buttons on his coat. He slid the bolt on his door and
turning to his colleague said resolutely: "I can give you some
information, if you won't implicate me. You can do as you like,
but keep my name out of it. For several hours last night cases of
eggs and boxes of oranges were being carried into the Chief
Steward's cabin by a flunky of his from the galley. Whatever port
we make, he can get a shilling each for the fresh eggs, and
perhaps sixpence for the oranges. They are your property, of
course, furnished by your government; but this is his customary
perquisite. I've been on this boat six years, and it's always
been so. About a week before we make port, the choicest of the
remaining stores are taken to his cabin, and he disposes of them
after we dock. I can't say just how he manages it, but he does.
The skipper may know of this custom, and there may be some reason
why he permits it. It's not my business to see anything. The
Chief Steward is a powerful man on an English vessel. If he has
anything against me, sooner or later he can lose my berth for me.
There you have the facts."

"Have I your permission to go to the Chief Steward ?" Dr. Trueman
asked.

"Certainly not. But you can go without my knowledge. He's an ugly
man to cross, and he can make it uncomfortable for you and your
patients."

"Well, we'll say no more about it. I appreciate your telling me,
and I will see that you don't get mixed up in this. Will you go
down with me to look at that new meningitis case ?"

Claude waited impatiently in his stateroom for the doctor's
return. He didn't see why the Chief Steward shouldn't be exposed
and dealt with like any other grafter. He had hated the man ever
since he heard him berating the old bath steward one morning.
Hawkins had made no attempt to defend himself, but stood like a
dog that has been terribly beaten, trembling all over, saying
"Yes, sir. Yes, sir," while his chief gave him a cold cursing in
a low, snarling voice. Claude had never heard a man or even an
animal addressed with such contempt. The Steward had a cruel
face,--white as cheese, with limp, moist hair combed back from a
high forehead,--the peculiarly oily hair that seems to grow only
on the heads of stewards and waiters. His eyes were exactly the
shape of almonds, but the lids were so swollen that the dull
pupil was visible only through a narrow slit. A long, pale
moustache hung like a fringe over his loose lips.

When Dr. Trueman came back from the hospital, he declared he was
now ready to call on Mr. Micks. "He's a nasty looking customer,
but he can't do anything to me."

They went to the Chief Steward's cabin and knocked.

"What's wanted ?" called a threatening voice.

The doctor made a grimace to his companion and walked in. The
Steward was sitting at a big desk, covered with account books. He
turned in his chair. "I beg your pardon," he said coldly, "I do
not see any one here. I will be--"

The doctor held up his hand quickly. "That's all right, Steward.
I'm sorry to intrude, but I've something I must say to you in
private. I'll not detain you long." If he had hesitated for a
moment, Claude believed the Steward would have thrown him out,
but he went on rapidly. "This is Lieutenant Wheeler, Mr. Micks.
His fellow officer lies very ill with pneumonia in stateroom 96.
Lieutenant Wheeler has kept him alive by special nursing. He is
not able to retain anything in his stomach but eggs and orange
juice. If he has these, we may be able to keep up his strength
till the fever breaks, and carry him to a hospital in France. If
we can't get them for him, he will be dead within twenty-four
hours. That's the situation."

The steward rose and turned out the drop-light on his desk. "Have
you received notice that there are no more eggs and oranges on
board ? Then I am afraid there is nothing I can do for you. I did
not provision this ship."

"No. I understand that. I believe the United States Government
provided the fruit and eggs and meat. And I positively know that
the articles I need for my patient are not exhausted. Without
going into the matter further, I warn you that I'm not going to
let a United States officer die when the means of saving him are
procurable. I'll go to the skipper, I'll call a meeting of the
army officers on board. I'll go any length to save this man."

"That is your own affair, but you will not interfere with me in
the discharge of my duties. Will you leave my cabin ?"

"In a moment, Steward. I know that last night a number of cases
of eggs and oranges were carried into this room. They are here
now, and they belong to the A.E.F. If you will agree to provision
my man, what I know won't go any further. But if you refuse, I'll
get this matter investigated. I won't stop till I do."

The Steward sat down, and took up a pen. His large, soft hand
looked cheesy, like his face. "What is the number of the cabin ?"
he asked indifferently.

"Ninety-six."

"Exactly what do you require ?"

"One dozen eggs and one dozen oranges every twenty-four hours, to
be delivered at any time convenient to you."

"I will see what I can do."

The Steward did not look up from his writing pad, and his
visitors left as abruptly as they had come.

At about four o'clock every morning, before even the bath
stewards were on duty, there was a scratching at Claude's door,
and a covered basket was left there by a messenger who was
unwashed, half-naked, with a sacking apron tied round his middle
and his hairy chest splashed with flour. He never spoke, had only
one eye and an inflamed socket. Claude learned that he was a
half-witted brother of the Chief Steward, a potato peeler and
dish-washer in the galley.

Four day after their interview with Mr. Micks, when they were at
last nearing the end of the voyage, Doctor Trueman detained
Claude after medical inspection to tell him that the Chief
Steward had come down with the epidemic. "He sent for me last
night and asked me to take his case,--won't have anything to do
with Chessup. I had to get Chessup's permission. He seemed very
glad to hand the case over to me."

"Is he very bad ?"

"He hasn't a look-in, and he knows it. Complications; chronic
Bright's disease. It seems he has nine children. I'll try to get
him into a hospital when we make port, but he'll only live a few
days at most. I wonder who'll get the shillings for all the eggs
and oranges he hoarded away. Claude, my boy," the doctor spoke
with sudden energy, "if I ever set foot on land again, I'm going
to forget this voyage like a bad dream. When I'm in normal
health, I'm a Presbyterian, but just now I feel that even the
wicked get worse than they deserve."

A day came at last when Claude was wakened from sleep by a sense
of stillness. He sprang up with a dazed fear that some one had
died; but Fanning lay in his berth, breathing quietly.

Something caught his eye through the porthole,--a great grey
shoulder of land standing up in the pink light of dawn, powerful
and strangely still after the distressing instability of the sea.
Pale trees and long, low fortifications... close grey
buildings with red roofs... little sailboats bounding seaward...
up on the cliff a gloomy fortress.

He had always thought of his destination as a country shattered
and desolated,--"bleeding France"; but he had never seen anything
that looked so strong, so self-sufficient, so fixed from the
first foundation, as the coast that rose before him. It was like
a pillar of eternity. The ocean lay submissive at its feet, and
over it was the great meekness of early morning.

This grey wall, unshaken, mighty, was the end of the long
preparation, as it was the end of the sea. It was the reason for
everything that had happened in his life for the last fifteen
months. It was the reason why Tannhauser and the gentle
Virginian, and so many others who had set out with him, were
never to have any life at all, or even a soldier's death. They
were merely waste in a great enterprise, thrown overboard like
rotten ropes. For them this kind release,--trees and a still
shore and quiet water,--was never, never to be. How long would
their bodies toss, he wondered, in that inhuman kingdom of
darkness and unrest ?

He was startled by a weak voice from behind.

"Claude, are we over ?"

"Yes, Fanning. We're over."






Book Five: "Bidding the Eagles of the West Fly On"

I

At noon that day Claude found himself in a street of little
shops, hot and perspiring, utterly confused and turned about.
Truck drivers and boys on bell less bicycles shouted at him
indignantly, furiously. He got under the shade of a young plane
tree and stood close to the trunk, as if it might protect him.
His greatest care, at any rate, was off his hands. With the help
of Victor Morse he had hired a taxi for forty francs, taken
Fanning to the base hospital, and seen him into the arms of a big
orderly from Texas. He came away from the hospital with no idea
where he was going--except that he wanted to get to the heart of
the city. It seemed, however, to have no heart; only long, stony
arteries, full of heat and noise. He was still standing there,
under his plane tree, when a group of uncertain, lost-looking
brown figures, headed by Sergeant Hicks, came weaving up the
street; nine men in nine different attitudes of dejection, each
with a long loaf of bread under his arm. They hailed Claude with
joy, straightened up, and looked as if now they had found their
way! He saw that he must be a plane tree for somebody else.

Sergeant Hicks explained that they had been trudging about the
town, looking for cheese. After sixteen days of heavy, tasteless
food, cheese was what they all wanted. There was a grocery store
up the street, where there seemed to be everything else. He had
tried to make the old woman understand by signs.

"Don't these French people eat cheese, anyhow ? What's their word
for it, Lieutenant ? I'm damned if I know, and I've lost my phrase
book. Suppose you could make her understand ?"

"Well, I'll try. Come along, boys."

Crowding close together, the ten men entered the shop. The
proprietress ran forward with an exclamation of despair.
Evidently she had thought she was done with them, and was not
pleased to see them coming back. When she paused to take breath,
Claude took off his hat respectfully, and performed the bravest
act of his life; uttered the first phrase-book sentence he had
ever spoken to a French person. His men were at his back; he had
to say something or run, there was no other course. Looking the
old woman in the eye, he steadily articulated:

"Avez-vous du fromage, Madame ?" It was almost inspiration to add
the last word, he thought; and when it worked, he was as much
startled as if his revolver had gone off in his belt.

"Du fromage ?" the shop woman screamed. Calling something to her
daughter, who was at the desk, she caught Claude by the sleeve,
pulled him out of the shop, and ran down the street with him. She
dragged him into a doorway darkened by a long curtain, greeted
the proprietress, and then pushed the men after their officer, as
if they were stubborn burros.

They stood blinking in the gloom, inhaling a sour, damp, buttery,
smear-kase smell, until their eyes penetrated the shadows and
they saw that there was nothing but cheese and butter in the
place. The shopkeeper was a fat woman, with black eyebrows that
met above her nose; her sleeves were rolled up, her cotton dress
was open over her white throat and bosom. She began at once to
tell them that there was a restriction on milk products; every
one must have cards; she could not sell them so much. But soon
there was nothing left to dispute about. The boys fell upon her
stock like wolves. The little white cheeses that lay on green
leaves disappeared into big mouths. Before she could save it,
Hicks had split a big round cheese through the middle and was
carving it up like a melon. She told them they were dirty pigs
and worse than the Boches, but she could not stop them.

"What's the matter with Mother, Lieutenant ? What's she fussing
about ? Ain't she here to sell goods ?"

Claude tried to look wiser than he was. "From what I can make
out, there's some sort of restriction; you aren't allowed to buy
all you want. We ought to have thought about that; this is a war
country. I guess we've about cleaned her out."

"Oh, that's all right," said Hicks wiping his clasp-knife. "We'll
bring her some sugar tomorrow. One of the fellows who helped us
unload at the docks told me you can always quiet 'em if you give
'em sugar."

They surrounded her and held out their money for her to take her
pay. "Come on, ma'm, don't be bashful. What's the matter, ain't
this good money ?"

She was distracted by the noise they made, by their bronzed faces
with white teeth and pale eyes, crowding so close to her. Ten
large, well-shaped hands with straight fingers, the open palms
full of crumpled notes.... Holding the men off under the
pretence of looking for a pencil, she made rapid calculations.
The money that lay in their palms had no relation to these big,
coaxing, boisterous fellows; it was a joke to them; they didn't
know what it meant in the world. Behind them were shiploads of
money, and behind the ships....

The situation was unfair. Whether she took much or little out of
their hands, couldn't possibly matter to the Americans, couldn't
even dash their good humour. But there was a strain on the
cheesewoman, and the standards of a lifetime were in jeopardy.
Her mind mechanically fixed upon two-and-a-half; she would charge
them two-and-a-half times the market price of the cheese. With
this moral plank to cling to, she made change with conscientious
accuracy and did not keep a penny too much from anybody. Telling
them what big stupids they were, and that it was necessary to
learn to count in this world, she urged them out of her shop. She
liked them well enough, but she did not like to do business with
them. If she didn't take their money, the next one would. All the
same, fictitious values were distasteful to her, and made
everything seem flimsy and unsafe.

Standing in her doorway, she watched the brown band go ambling
down the street; as they passed in front of the old church of St.
Jacques, the two foremost stumbled on a sunken step that was
scarcely above the level of the pavement. She laughed aloud. They
looked back and waved to her. She replied with a smile that was
both friendly and angry. She liked them, but not the legend of
waste and prodigality that ran before them--and followed after.
It was superfluous and disintegrating in a world of hard facts.
An army in which the men had meat for breakfast, and ate more
every day than the French soldiers at the front got in a week!
Their moving kitchens and supply trains were the wonder of
France. Down below Arles, where her husband's sister had married,
on the desolate plain of the Crau, their tinned provisions were
piled like mountain ranges, under sheds and canvas. Nobody had
ever seen so much food before; coffee, milk, sugar, bacon, hams;
everything the world was famished for. They brought shiploads of
useless things, too. And useless people. Shiploads of women who
were not nurses; some said they came to dance with the officers,
so they would not be ennuyés.

All this was not war,--any more than having money thrust at you
by grown men who could not count, was business. It was an
invasion, like the other. The first destroyed material
possessions, and this threatened everybody's integrity. Distaste
of such methods, deep, recoiling distrust of them, clouded the
cheesewoman's brow as she threw her money into the drawer and
turned the key on it.

As for the doughboys, having once stubbed their toes on the
sunken step, they examined it with interest, and went in to
explore the church. It was in their minds that they must not let
a church escape, any more than they would let a Boche escape.
Within they came upon a bunch of their shipmates, including the
Kansas band, to whom they boasted that their Lieutenant could
"speak French like a native."

The Lieutenant himself thought he was getting on pretty well, but
a few hours later his pride was humbled. He was sitting alone in
a little triangular park beside another church, admiring the
cropped locust trees and watching some old women who were doing
their mending in the shade. A little boy in a black apron, with a
close-shaved, bare head, came along, skipping rope. He hopped
lightly up to Claude and said in a most persuasive and confiding
voice,

"Voulez-vous me dire l'heure, s'il vous plaît, M'sieu' l'
soldat ?"

Claude looked down into his admiring eyes with a feeling of
panic. He wouldn't mind being dumb to a man, or even to a pretty
girl, but this was terrible. His tongue went dry, and his face
grew scarlet. The child's expectant gaze changed to a look of
doubt, and then of fear. He had spoken before to Americans who
didn't understand, but they had not turned red and looked angry
like this one; this soldier must be ill, or wrong in his head.
The boy turned and ran away.

Many a serious mishap had distressed Claude less. He was
disappointed, too. There was something friendly in the boy's face
that he wanted... that he needed. As he rose he ground his
heel into the gravel. "Unless I can learn to talk to the CHILDREN
of this country," he muttered, "I'll go home!"



II

Claude set off to find the Grand Hotel, where he had promised to
dine with Victor Morse. The porter there spoke English. He called
a red-headed boy in a dirty uniform and told him to take the
American to vingt-quatre. The boy also spoke English. "Plenty
money in New York, I guess! In France, no money." He made their
way, through musty corridors and up slippery staircases, as long
as possible, shrewdly eyeing the visitor and rubbing his thumb
nervously against his fingers all the while.

"Vingt-quatre, twen'y-four," he announced, rapping at a door with
one hand and suggestively opening the other. Claude put something
into it--anything to be rid of him.

Victor was standing before the fireplace. "Hello, Wheeler, come
in. Our dinner will be served up here. It's big enough, isn't it ?
I could get nothing between a coop, and this at fifteen dollars a
day."

The room was spacious enough for a banquet; with two huge beds,
and great windows that swung in on hinges, like doors, and that
had certainly not been washed since before the war. The heavy red
cotton-brocade hangings and lace curtains were stiff with dust,
the thick carpet was strewn with cigarette-ends and matches.
Razor blades and "Khaki Comfort" boxes lay about on the dresser,
and former occupants had left their autographs in the dust on the
table. Officers slept there, and went away, and other officers
arrived,--and the room remained the same, like a wood in which
travellers camp for the night. The valet de chambre carried away
only what he could use; discarded shirts and socks and old shoes.
It seemed a rather dismal place to have a party.

When the waiter came, he dusted off the table with his apron and
put on a clean cloth, napkins, and glasses. Victor and his guest
sat down under an electric light bulb with a broken shade, around
which a silent halo of flies moved unceasingly. They did not
buzz, or dart aloft, or descend to try the soup, but hung there
in the center of the room as if they were a part of the lighting
system. The constant attendance of the waiter embarrassed Claude;
he felt as if he were being watched.

"By the way," said Victor while the soup plates were being
removed, "what do you think of this wine ? It cost me thirty
francs the bottle."

"It tastes very good to me," Claude replied. "But then, it's the
first champagne I've ever drunk."

"Really ?" Victor drank off another glass and sighed. "I envy you.
I wish I had it all to do over. Life's too short, you know."

"I should say you had made a good beginning. We're a long way
from Crystal Lake."

"Not far enough." His host reached across the table and filled
Claude's empty glass. "I sometimes waken up with the feeling I'm
back there. Or I have bad dreams, and find myself sitting on that
damned stool in the glass cage and can't make my books balance; I
hear the old man coughing in his private room, the way he coughs
when he's going to refuse a loan to some poor devil who needs it.
I've had a narrow escape, Wheeler; 'as a brand from the burning'.
That's all the Scripture I remember."

The bright red spots on Victor's cheeks, his pale forehead and
brilliant eyes and saucy little moustaches seemed to give his
quotation a peculiar vividness. Claude envied him. It must be
great fun to take up a part and play it to a finish; to believe
you were making yourself over, and to admire the kind of fellow
you made. He, too, in a way, admired Victor,--though he couldn't
altogether believe in him.

"You'll never go back," he said, "I wouldn't worry about that."

"Take it from me, there are thousands who will never go back! I'm
not speaking of the casualties. Some of you Americans are likely
to discover the world this trip... and it'll make the hell of
a lot of difference! You boys never had a fair chance. There's a
conspiracy of Church and State to keep you down. I'm going off to
play with some girls tonight, will you come along ?"

Claude laughed. "I guess not."

"Why not ? You won't be caught, I guarantee."

"I guess not." Claude spoke apologetically. "I'm going out to see
Fanning after dinner."

Victor shrugged. "That ass!" He beckoned the waiter to open
another bottle and bring the coffee. "Well, it's your last chance
to go nutting with me." He looked intently at Claude and lifted
his glass. "To the future, and our next meeting!" When he put
down his empty goblet he remarked, "I got a wire through today;
I'm leaving tomorrow."

"For London ?"

"For Verdun."

Claude took a quick breath. Verdun... the very sound of the
name was grim, like the hollow roll of drums. Victor was going
there tomorrow. Here one could take a train for Verdun, or
thereabouts, as at home one took a train for Omaha. He felt more
"over" than he had done before, and a little crackle of
excitement went all through him. He tried to be careless:

"Then you won't get to London soon ?"

"God knows," Victor answered gloomily. He looked up at the
ceiling and began to whistle softly an engaging air. "Do you know
that ? It's something Maisie often plays; 'Roses of Picardy.' You
won't know what a woman can be till you meet her, Wheeler."

"I hope I'll have that pleasure. I was wondering if you'd
forgotten her for the moment. She doesn't object to these
diversions ?"

Victor lifted his eyebrows in the old haughty way. "Women don't
require that sort of fidelity of the air service. Our engagements
are too uncertain."

Half an hour later Victor had gone in quest of amorous adventure,
and Claude was wandering alone in a brightly lighted street full
of soldiers and sailors of all nations. There were black
Senegalese, and Highlanders in kilts, and little lorry-drivers
from Siam,--all moving slowly along between rows of cabarets and
cinema theatres. The wide-spreading branches of the plane trees
met overhead, shutting out the sky and roofing in the orange
glare. The sidewalks were crowded with chairs and little tables,
at which marines and soldiers sat drinking schnapps and cognac and
coffee. From every doorway music-machines poured out jazz tunes
and strident Sousa marches. The noise was stupefying. Out in the
middle of the street a band of bareheaded girls, hardy and tough
looking; were following a string of awkward Americans, running
into them, elbowing them, asking for treats, crying, "You dance
me Fausse-trot, Sammie ?"

Claude stationed himself before a movie theatre, where the sign
in electric lights read, "Amour, quand tu nous tiens!" and stood
watching the people. In the stream that passed him, his eye lit
upon two walking arm-in-arm, their hands clasped, talking eagerly
and unconscious of the crowd,--different, he saw at once, from
all the other strolling, affectionate couples.

The man wore the American uniform; his left arm had been
amputated at the elbow, and he carried his head awry, as if he
had a stiff neck. His dark, lean face wore an expression of
intense anxiety, his eyebrows twitched as if he were in constant
pain. The girl, too, looked troubled. As they passed him, under
the red light of the Amour sign, Claude could see that her eyes
were full of tears. They were wide, blue eyes, innocent looking,
and she had the prettiest face he had seen since he landed. From
her silk shawl, and little bonnet with blue strings and a white
frill, he thought she must be a country girl. As she listened to
the soldier, with her mouth half-open, he saw a space between her
two front teeth, as with children whose second teeth have just
come. While they pushed along in the crowd she looked up intently
at the man beside her, or off into the blur of light, where she
evidently saw nothing. Her face, young and soft, seemed new to
emotion, and her bewildered look made one feel that she did not
know where to turn.

Without realizing what he did, Claude followed them out of the
crowd into a quiet street, and on into another, even more
deserted, where the houses looked as if they had been asleep a
long while. Here there were no street lamps, not even a light in
the windows, but natural darkness; with the moon high overhead
throwing sharp shadows across the white cobble paving. The narrow
street made a bend, and he came out upon the church he and his
comrades had entered that afternoon. It looked larger by night,
and but for the sunken step, he might not have been sure it was
the same. The dark neighbouring houses seemed to lean toward it,
the moonlight shone silver-grey upon its battered front.

The two walking before him ascended the steps and withdrew into
the deep doorway, where they clung together in an embrace so long
and still that it was like death. At last they drew shuddering
apart. The girl sat down on the stone bench beside the door. The
soldier threw himself upon the pavement at her feet, and rested
his head on her knee, his one arm lying across her lap.

In the shadow of the houses opposite, Claude kept watch like a
sentinel, ready to take their part if any alarm should startle
them. The girl bent over her soldier, stroking his head so softly
that she might have been putting him to sleep; took his one hand
and held it against her bosom as if to stop the pain there. Just
behind her, on the sculptured portal, some old bishop, with a
pointed cap and a broken crozier, stood, holding up two fingers.



III

The next morning when Claude arrived at the hospital to see
Fanning, he found every one too busy to take account of him. The
courtyard was full of ambulances, and a long line of camions
waited outside the gate. A train-load of wounded Americans had
come in, sent back from evacuation hospitals to await
transportation home.

As the men were carried past him, he thought they looked as if
they had been sick a long while--looked, indeed, as if they could
never get well. The boys who died on board the Anchises had never
seemed as sick as these did. Their skin was yellow or purple,
their eyes were sunken, their lips sore. Everything that belonged
to health had left them, every attribute of youth was gone. One
poor fellow, whose face and trunk were wrapped in cotton, never
stopped moaning, and as he was carried up the corridor he smelled
horribly. The Texas orderly remarked to Claude, "In the beginning
that one only had a finger blown off; would you believe it ?"

These were the first wounded men Claude had seen. To shed bright
blood, to wear the red badge of courage,--that was one thing; but
to be reduced to this was quite another. Surely, the sooner
these boys died, the better.

The Texan, passing with his next load, asked Claude why he didn't
go into the office and wait until the rush was over. Looking in
through the glass door, Claude noticed a young man writing at a
desk enclosed by a railing. Something about his figure, about the
way he held his head, was familiar. When he lifted his left arm
to prop open the page of his ledger, it was a stump below the
elbow. Yes, there could be no doubt about it; the pale, sharp
face, the beak nose, the frowning, uneasy brow. Presently, as if
he felt a curious eye upon him, the young man paused in his rapid
writing, wriggled his shoulders, put an iron paperweight on the
page of his book, took a case from his pocket and shook a
cigarette out on the table. Going up to the railing, Claude
offered him a cigar. "No, thank you. I don't use them any more.
They seem too heavy for me." He struck a match, moved his
shoulders again as if they were cramped, and sat down on the edge
of his desk.

"Where do these wounded men come from ?" Claude asked. "I just got
in on the Anchises yesterday."

"They come from various evacuation hospitals. I believe most of
them are the Belleau Wood lot."

"Where did you lose your arm ?"

"Cantigny. I was in the First Division. I'd been over since last
September, waiting for something to happen, and then got fixed in
my first engagement."

"Can't you go home ?"

"Yes, I could. But I don't want to. I've got used to things over
here. I was attached to Headquarters in Paris for awhile."

Claude leaned across the rail. "We read about Cantigny at home,
of course. We were a good deal excited; I suppose you were ?"

"Yes, we were nervous. We hadn't been under fire, and we'd been
fed up on all that stuff about it's taking fifty years to build a
fighting machine. The Hun had a strong position; we looked up
that long hill and wondered how we were going to behave." As he
talked the boy's eyes seemed to be moving all the time, probably
because he could not move his head at all. After blowing out deep
clouds of smoke until his cigarette was gone, he sat down to his
ledger and frowned at the page in a way which said he was too
busy to talk.

Claude saw Dr. Trueman standing in the doorway, waiting for him.
They made their morning call on Fanning, and left the hospital
together. The Doctor turned to him as if he had something on his
mind.

"I saw you talking to that wry-necked boy. How did he seem, all
right ?"

"Not exactly. That is, he seems very nervous. Do you know
anything about him ?"

"Oh, yes! He's a star patient here, a psychopathic case. I had
just been talking to one of the doctors about him, when I came
out and saw you with him. He was shot in the neck at Cantigny,
where he lost his arm. The wound healed, but his memory is
affected; some nerve cut, I suppose, that connects with that part
of his brain. This psychopath, Phillips, takes a great interest
in him and keeps him here to observe him. He's writing a book
about him. He says the fellow has forgotten almost everything
about his life before he came to France. The queer thing is, it's
his recollection of women that is most affected. He can remember
his father, but not his mother; doesn't know if he has sisters or
not,--can remember seeing girls about the house, but thinks they
may have been cousins. His photographs and belongings were lost
when he was hurt, all except a bunch of letters he had in his
pocket. They are from a girl he's engaged to, and he declares he
can't remember her at all; doesn't know what she looks like or
anything about her, and can't remember getting engaged. The
doctor has the letters. They seem to be from a nice girl in his
own town who is very ambitious for him to make the most of
himself. He deserted soon after he was sent to this hospital, ran
away. He was found on a farm out in the country here, where the
sons had been killed and the people had sort of adopted him. He'd
quit his uniform and was wearing the clothes of one of the dead
sons. He'd probably have got away with it, if he hadn't had that
wry neck. Some one saw him in the fields and recognized him and
reported him. I guess nobody cared much but this psychopathic
doctor; he wanted to get his pet patient back. They call him 'the
lost American' here."

"He seems to be doing some sort of clerical work," Claude
observed discreetly.

"Yes, they say he's very well educated. He remembers the books he
has read better than his own life. He can't recall what his home
town looks like, or his home. And the women are clear wiped out,
even the girl he was going to marry."

Claude smiled. "Maybe he's fortunate in that."

The Doctor turned to him affectionately, "Now Claude, don't begin
to talk like that the minute you land in this country."

Claude walked on past the church of St. Jacques. Last night
already seemed like a dream, but it haunted him. He wished he
could do something to help that boy; help him get away from the
doctor who was writing a book about him, and the girl who wanted
him to make the most of himself; get away and be lost altogether
in what he had been lucky enough to find. All day, as Claude came
and went, he looked among the crowds for that young face, so
compassionate and tender.



IV

Deeper and deeper into flowery France! That was the sentence
Claude kept saying over to himself to the jolt of the wheels, as
the long troop train went southward, on the second day after he
and his company had left the port of debarkation. Fields of
wheat, fields of oats, fields of rye; all the low hills and
rolling uplands clad with harvest. And everywhere, in the grass,
in the yellowing grain, along the road-bed, the poppies spilling
and streaming. On the second day the boys were still calling to
each other about the poppies; nothing else had so entirely
surpassed their expectations. They had supposed that poppies grew
only on battle fields, or in the brains of war correspondents.
Nobody knew what the cornflowers were, except Willy Katz, an
Austrian boy from the Omaha packing-houses, and he knew only an
objectionable name for them, so he offered no information. For a
long time they thought the red clover blossoms were wild
flowers,--they were as big as wild roses. When they passed the
first alfalfa field, the whole train rang with laughter; alfalfa
was one thing, they believed, that had never been heard of
outside their own prairie states.

All the way down, Company B had been finding the old things
instead of the new,--or, to their way of thinking, the new things
instead of the old. The thatched roofs they had so counted upon
seeing were few and far between. But American binders, of
well-known makes, stood where the fields were beginning to
ripen,--and they were being oiled and put in order, not by
"peasants," but by wise-looking old farmers who seemed to know
their business. Pear trees, trained like vines against the wall,
did not astonish them half so much as the sight of the familiar
cottonwood, growing everywhere. Claude thought he had never
before realized how beautiful this tree could be. In verdant
little valleys, along the clear rivers, the cottonwoods waved and
rustled; and on the little islands, of which there were so many
in these rivers, they stood in pointed masses, seemed to grip
deep into the soil and to rest easy, as if they had been there
for ever and would be there for ever more. At home, all about
Frankfort, the farmers were cutting down their cottonwoods
because they were "common," planting maples and ash trees to
struggle along in their stead. Never mind; the cottonwoods were
good enough for France, and they were good enough for him! He
felt they were a real bond between him and this people.

When B Company had first got their orders to go into a training
camp in north central France, all the men were disappointed.
Troops much rawer than they were being rushed to the front, so
why fool around any longer ? But now they were reconciled to the
delay. There seemed to be a good deal of France that wasn't the
war, and they wouldn't mind travelling about a little in a
country like this. Was the harvest always a month later than at
home, as it seemed to be this year ? Why did the farmers have rows
of trees growing along the edges of every field--didn't they take
the strength out of the soil ? What did the farmers mean by
raising patches of mustard right along beside other crops ? Didn't
they know that mustard got into wheat fields and strangled the
grain ?

The second night the boys were to spend in Rouen, and they would
have the following day to look about. Everybody knew what had
happened at Rouen--if any one didn't, his neighbours were only too
eager to inform him! It had happened in the market-place, and the
market-place was what they were going to find.

Tomorrow, when it came, proved to be black and cold, a day of
pouring rain. As they filed through the narrow, crowded streets,
that harsh Norman city presented no very cheering aspect. They
were glad, at last, to find the waterside, to go out on the
bridge and breathe the air in the great open space over the
river, away from the clatter of cart-wheels and the hard voices
and crafty faces of these townspeople, who seemed rough and
unfriendly. From the bridge they looked up at the white chalk
hills, the tops a blur of intense green under the low,
lead-coloured sky. They watched the fleets of broad, deep-set
river barges, coming and going under their feet, with tilted
smokestacks. Only a little way up that river was Paris, the place
where every doughboy meant to go; and as they leaned on the rail
and looked down at the slow-flowing water, each one had in his
mind a confused picture of what it would be like. The Seine, they
felt sure, must be very much wider there, and it was spanned by
many bridges, all longer than the bridge over the Missouri at
Omaha. There would be spires and golden domes past counting, all
the buildings higher than anything in Chicago, and
brilliant--dazzlingly brilliant, nothing grey and shabby about it
like this old Rouen. They attributed to the city of their desire
incalculable immensity, bewildering vastness, Babylonian hugeness
and heaviness--the only attributes they had been taught to admire.

Late in the morning Claude found himself alone before the Church
of St. Ouen. He was hunting for the Cathedral, and this looked as
if it might be the right place. He shook the water from his
raincoat and entered, removing his hat at the door. The day, so
dark without, was darker still within;... far away, a few
scattered candles, still little points of light... just before
him, in the grey twilight, slender white columns in long rows,
like the stems of silver poplars.

The entrance to the nave was closed by a cord, so he walked up
the aisle on the right, treading softly, passing chapels where
solitary women knelt in the light of a few tapers. Except for
them, the church was empty... empty. His own breathing was
audible in this silence. He moved with caution lest he should
wake an echo.

When he reached the choir he turned, and saw, far behind him, the
rose window, with its purple heart. As he stood staring, hat in
hand, as still as the stone figures in the chapels, a great bell,
up aloft, began to strike the hour in its deep, melodious throat;
eleven beats, measured and far apart, as rich as the colours in
the window, then silence... only in his memory the throbbing
of an undreamed-of quality of sound. The revelations of the glass
and the bell had come almost simultaneously, as if one produced
the other; and both were superlatives toward which his mind had
always been groping,--or so it seemed to him then.

In front of the choir the nave was open, with no rope to shut it
off. Several straw chairs were huddled on a flag of the stone
floor. After some hesitation he took one, turned it round, and
sat down facing the window. If some one should come up to him and
say anything, anything at all, he would rise and say, "Pardon,
Monsieur; je ne sais pas c'est defendu." He repeated this to
himself to be quite sure he had it ready.

On the train, coming down, he had talked to the boys about the
bad reputation Americans had acquired for slouching all over the
place and butting in on things, and had urged them to tread
lightly, "But Lieutenant," the kid from Pleasantville had piped
up, "isn't this whole Expedition a butt-in ? After all, it ain't
our war." Claude laughed, but he told him he meant to make an
example of the fellow who went to rough-housing.

He was well satisfied that he hadn't his restless companions on
his mind now. He could sit here quietly until noon, and hear the
bell strike again. In the meantime, he must try to think: This
was, of course, Gothic architecture; he had read more or less
about that, and ought to be able to remember something. Gothic...
that was a mere word; to him it suggested something very
peaked and pointed,--sharp arches, steep roofs. It had nothing to
do with these slim white columns that rose so straight and
far,--or with the window, burning up there in its vault of
gloom....

While he was vainly trying to think about architecture, some
recollection of old astronomy lessons brushed across his
brain,--something about stars whose light travels through space
for hundreds of years before it reaches the earth and the human
eye. The purple and crimson and peacock-green of this window had
been shining quite as long as that before it got to him....
He felt distinctly that it went through him and farther still...
as if his mother were looking over his shoulder. He sat
solemnly through the hour until twelve, his elbows on his knees,
his conical hat swinging between them in his hand, looking up
through the twilight with candid, thoughtful eyes.

When Claude joined his company at the station, they had the laugh
on him. They had found the Cathedral,--and a statue of Richard
the Lion-hearted, over the spot where the lion-heart itself was
buried; "the identical organ," fat Sergeant Hicks assured him.
But they were all glad to leave Rouen.



V

B Company reached the training camp at S-- thirty-six men short:
twenty-five they had buried on the voyage over, and eleven sick
were left at the base hospital. The company was to be attached
to a battalion which had already seen service, commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Scott. Arriving early in the morning, the
officers reported at once to Headquarters. Captain Maxey must
have suffered a shock when the Colonel rose from his desk to
acknowledge his salute, then shook hands with them all around
and asked them about their journey. The Colonel was not a very
martial figure; short, fat, with slouching shoulders, and a
lumpy back like a sack of potatoes. Though he wasn't much over
forty, he was bald, and his collar would easily slip over his
head without being unbuttoned. His little twinkling eyes and
good-humoured face were without a particle of arrogance or
official dignity.

Years ago, when General Pershing, then a handsome young
Lieutenant with a slender waist and yellow moustaches, was
stationed as Commandant at the University of Nebraska, Walter
Scott was an officer in a company of cadets the Lieutenant took
about to military tournaments. The Pershing Rifles, they were
called, and they won prizes wherever they went. After his
graduation, Scott settled down to running a hardware business in
a thriving Nebraska town, and sold gas ranges and garden hose for
twenty years. About the time Pershing was sent to the Mexican
border, Scott began to think there might eventually be something
in the wind, and that he would better get into training. He went
down to Texas with the National Guard. He had come to France with
the First Division, and had won his promotions by solid,
soldierly qualities.

"I see you're an officer short, Captain Maxey," the Colonel
remarked at their conference. "I think I've got a man here to
take his place. Lieutenant Gerhardt is a New York man, came over
in the band and got transferred to infantry. He has lately been
given a commission for good service. He's had some experience and
is a capable fellow." The Colonel sent his orderly out to bring
in a young man whom he introduced to the officers as Lieutenant
David Gerhardt.

Claude had been ashamed of Tod Fanning, who was always showing
himself a sap-head, and who would never have got a commission if
his uncle hadn't been a Congressman. But the moment he met
Lieutenant Gerhardt's eye, something like jealousy flamed up in
him. He felt in a flash that he suffered by comparison with the
new officer; that he must be on his guard and must not let
himself be patronized.

As they were leaving the Colonel's office together, Gerhardt
asked him whether he had got his billet. Claude replied that
after the men were in their quarters, he would look out for
something for himself.

The young man smiled. "I'm afraid you may have difficulty. The
people about here have been overworked, keeping soldiers, and
they are not willing as they once were. I'm with a nice old
couple over in the village. I'm almost sure I can get you in
there. If you'll come along, we'll speak to them, before some one
else is put off on them."

Claude didn't want to go, didn't want to accept
favours,--nevertheless he went. They walked together along a
dusty road that ran between half-ripe wheat fields, bordered with
poplar trees. The wild morning-glories and Queen Anne's lace that
grew by the road-side were still shining with dew. A fresh breeze
stirred the bearded grain, parting it in furrows and fanning out
streaks of crimson poppies. The new officer was not intrusive,
certainly. He walked along, whistling softly to himself, seeming
quite lost in the freshness of the morning, or in his own
thoughts. There had been nothing patronizing in his manner so
far, and Claude began to wonder why he felt ill at ease with him.
Perhaps it was because he did not look like the rest of them.
Though he was young, he did not look boyish. He seemed
experienced; a finished product, rather than something on the
way. He was handsome, and his face, like his manner and his walk,
had something distinguished about it. A broad white forehead
under reddish brown hair, hazel eyes with no uncertainty in their
look, an aquiline nose, finely cut,--a sensitive, scornful mouth,
which somehow did not detract from the kindly, though slightly
reserved, expression of his face.

Lieutenant Gerhardt must have been in this neighbourhood for some
time; he seemed to know the people. On the road they passed
several villagers; a rough looking girl taking a cow out to graze,
an old man with a basket on his arm, the postman on his bicycle;
they all spoke to Claude's companion as if they knew him well.

"What are these blue flowers that grow about everywhere ?" Claude
asked suddenly, pointing to a clump with his foot.

"Cornflowers," said the other. "The Germans call them
Kaiser-blumen."

They were approaching the village, which lay on the edge of a
wood,--a wood so large one could not see the end of it; it met
the horizon with a ridge of pines. The village was but a single
street. On either side ran clay-coloured walls, with painted
wooden doors here and there, and green shutters. Claude's guide
opened one of these gates, and they walked into a little sanded
garden; the house was built round it on three sides. Under a
cherry tree sat a woman in a black dress, sewing, a work table
beside her.

She was fifty, perhaps, but though her hair was grey she had a
look of youthfulness; thin cheeks, delicately flushed with pink,
and quiet, smiling, intelligent eyes. Claude thought she looked
like a New England woman,--like the photographs of his mother's
cousins and schoolmates. Lieutenant Gerhardt introduced him to
Madame Joubert. He was quite disheartened by the colloquy that
followed. Clearly his new fellow officer spoke Madame Joubert's
perplexing language as readily as she herself did, and he felt
irritated and grudging as he listened. He had been hoping that,
wherever he stayed, he could learn to talk to the people a
little; but with this accomplished young man about, he would
never have the courage to try. He could see that Mme. Joubert
liked Gerhardt, liked him very much; and all this, for some
reason, discouraged him.

Gerhardt turned to Claude, speaking in a way which included
Madame Joubert in the conversation, though she could not
understand it: "Madame Joubert will let you come, although she
has done her part and really doesn't have to take any one else
in. But you will be so well off here that I'm glad she consents.
You will have to share my room, but there are two beds. She will
show you."

Gerhardt went out of the gate and left him alone with his
hostess. Her mind seemed to read his thoughts. When he uttered a
word, or any sound that resembled one, she quickly and smoothly
made a sentence of it, as if she were quite accustomed to talking
in this way and expected only monosyllables from strangers. She
was kind, even a little playful with him; but he felt it was all
good manners, and that underneath she was not thinking of him at
all. When he was alone in the tile-floored sleeping room
upstairs, unrolling his blankets and arranging his shaving
things, he looked out of the window and watched her where she sat
sewing under the cherry tree. She had a very sad face, he
thought; it wasn't grief, nothing sharp and definite like sorrow.
It was an old, quiet, impersonal sadness,--sweet in its
expression, like the sadness of music.

As he came out of the house to start back to the barracks, he
bowed to her and tried to say, "Au revoir, Madame. Jusq' au ce
soir." He stopped near the kitchen door to look at a
many-branched rose vine that ran all over the wall, full of
cream-coloured, pink-tipped roses, just a shade stronger in
colour than the clay wall behind them. Madame Joubert came over
and stood beside him, looking at him and at the rosier, "Oui,
c'est joli, n'est-ce pas ?" She took the scissors that hung by a
ribbon from her belt, cut one of the flowers and stuck it in his
buttonhole. "Voilà." She made a little flourish with her thin
hand.

Stepping into the street, he turned to shut the wooden door after
him, and heard a soft stir in the dark tool-house at his elbow.
From among the rakes and spades a child's frightened face was
staring out at him. She was sitting on the ground with her lap
full of baby kittens. He caught but a glimpse of her dull, pale
face.



VI

The next morning Claude awoke with such a sense of physical
well-being as he had not had for a long time. The sun was
shining brightly on the white plaster walls and on the red tiles
of the floor. Green jalousies, half-drawn, shaded the upper part
of the two windows. Through their slats, he could see the forking
branches of an old locust tree that grew by the gate. A flock of
pigeons flew over it, dipping and mounting with a sharp twinkle
of silver wings. It was good to lie again in a house that was
cared for by women. He must have felt that even in his sleep,
for when he opened his eyes he was thinking about Mahailey and
breakfast and summer mornings on the farm. The early stillness
was sweet, and the feeling of dry, clean linen against his body.
There was a smell of lavender about his warm pillow. He lay
still for fear of waking Lieutenant Gerhardt. This was the sort
of peace one wanted to enjoy alone. When he rose cautiously on
his elbow and looked at the other bed, it was empty. His
companion must have dressed and slipped out when day first broke.
Somebody else who liked to enjoy things alone; that looked
hopeful. But now that he had the place to himself, he decided to
get up. While he was dressing he could see old M. Joubert down in
the garden, watering the plants and vines, raking the sand fresh
and smooth, clipping off dead leaves and withered flowers and
throwing them into a wheelbarrow. These people had lost both
their sons in the war, he had been told, and now they were taking
care of the property for their grandchildren,--two daughters of
the elder son. Claude saw Gerhardt come into the garden, and sit
down at the table under the trees, where they had their dinner
last night. He hurried down to join him. Gerhardt made room for
him on the bench.

"Do you always sleep like that ? It's an accomplishment. I made
enough noise when I dressed,--kept dropping things, but it never
reached you."

Madame Joubert came out of the kitchen in a purple flowered
morning gown, her hair in curl-papers under a lace cap. She
brought the coffee herself, and they sat down at the unpainted
table without a cloth, and drank it out of big crockery bowls.
They had fresh milk with it,--the first Claude had tasted in a
long while, and sugar which Gerhardt produced from his pocket.
The old cook had her coffee sitting in the kitchen door, and on
the step, at her feet, sat the strange, pale little girl.

Madame Joubert amiably addressed herself to Claude; she knew that
Americans were accustomed to a different sort of morning repast,
and if he wished to bring bacon from the camp, she would gladly
cook it for him. She had even made pancakes for officers who
stayed there before. She seemed pleased, however, to learn that
Claude had had enough of these things for awhile. She called
David by his first name, pronouncing it the French way, and when
Claude said he hoped she would do as much for him, she said, Oh,
yes, that his was a very good French name, "mais un peu, un peu...
romanesque," at which he blushed, not quite knowing whether
she were making fun of him or not.

"It is rather so in English, isn't it ?" David asked.

"Well, it's a sissy name, if you mean that."

"Yes, it is, a little," David admitted candidly. The day's work
on the parade ground was hard, and Captain Maxey's men were soft,
felt the heat,--didn't size up well with the Kansas boys who had
been hardened by service. The Colonel wasn't pleased with B
Company and detailed them to build new barracks and extend the
sanitation system. Claude got out and worked with the men.
Gerhardt followed his example, but it was easy to see that he
had never handled lumber or tin-roofing before. A kind of rivalry
seemed to have sprung up between him and Claude, neither of them
knew why.

Claude could see that the sergeants and corporals were a little
uncertain about Gerhardt. His laconic speech, never embroidered
by the picturesque slang they relished, his gravity, and his
rare, incredulous smile, alike puzzled them. Was the new officer
a dude ? Sergeant Hicks asked of his chum, Dell Able. No, he
wasn't a dude. Was he a swellhead ? No, not at all; but he wasn't
a good mixer. He was "an Easterner"; what more he was would
develop later. Claude sensed something unusual about him. He
suspected that Gerhardt knew a good many things as well as he
knew French, and that he tried to conceal it, as people sometimes
do when they feel they are not among their equals; this idea
nettled him. It was Claude who seized the opportunity to be
patronizing, when Gerhardt betrayed that he was utterly unable to
select lumber by given measurements.

The next afternoon, work on the new barracks was called off
because of rain. Sergeant Hicks set about getting up a boxing
match, but when he went to invite the lieutenants, they had both
disappeared. Claude was tramping toward the village, determined
to get into the big wood that had tempted him ever since his
arrival.

The highroad became the village street, and then, at the edge of
the wood, became a country road again. A little farther on, where
the shade grew denser, it split up into three wagon trails, two
of them faint and little used. One of these Claude followed. The
rain had dwindled to a steady patter, but the tall brakes growing
up in the path splashed him to the middle, and his feet sank in
spongy, mossy earth. The light about him, the very air, was
green. The trunks of the trees were overgrown with a soft green
moss, like mould. He was wondering whether this forest was not
always a damp, gloomy place, when suddenly the sun broke through
and shattered the whole wood with gold. He had never seen
anything like the quivering emerald of the moss, the silky green
of the dripping beech tops. Everything woke up; rabbits ran across
the path, birds began to sing, and all at once the brakes were
full of whirring insects.

The winding path turned again, and came out abruptly on a
hillside, above an open glade piled with grey boulders. On the
opposite rise of ground stood a grove of pines, with bare, red
stems. The light, around and under them, was red like a rosy
sunset. Nearly all the stems divided about half-way up into two
great arms, which came together again at the top, like the
pictures of old Grecian lyres.

Down in the grassy glade, among the piles of flint boulders,
little white birches shook out their shining leaves in the
lightly moving air. All about the rocks were patches of purple
heath; it ran up into the crevices between them like fire. On one
of these bald rocks sat Lieutenant Gerhardt, hatless, in an
attitude of fatigue or of deep dejection, his hands clasped about
his knees, his bronze hair ruddy in the sun. After watching him
for a few minutes, Claude descended the slope, swishing the tall
ferns.

"Will I be in the way ?" he asked as he stopped at the foot of the
rocks.

"Oh, no!" said the other, moving a little and unclasping his
hand.

Claude sat down on a boulder. "Is this heather ?" he asked. "I
thought I recognized it, from 'Kidnapped.' This part of the world
is not as new to you as it is to me."

"No. I lived in Paris for several years when I was a student."

"What were you studying ?"

"The violin."

"You are a musician ?" Claude looked at him wonderingly.

"I was," replied the other with a disdainful smile, languidly
stretching out his legs in the heather.

"That seems too bad," Claude remarked gravely.

"What does ?"

"Why, to take fellows with a special talent. There are enough of
us who haven't any."

Gerhardt rolled over on his back and put his hands under his
head. "Oh, this affair is too big for exceptions; it's universal.
If you happened to be born twenty-six years ago, you couldn't
escape. If this war didn't kill you in one way, it would in
another." He told Claude he had trained at Camp Dix, and had come
over eight months ago in a regimental band, but he hated the work
he had to do and got transferred to the infantry.

When they retraced their steps, the wood was full of green
twilight. Their relations had changed somewhat during the last
half hour, and they strolled in confidential silence up the
home-like street to the door of their own garden.

Since the rain was over, Madame Joubert had laid the cloth on the
plank table under the cherry tree, as on the previous evenings.
Monsieur was bringing the chairs, and the little girl was
carrying out a pile of heavy plates. She rested them against her
stomach and leaned back as she walked, to balance them. She wore
shoes, but no stockings, and her faded cotton dress switched
about her brown legs. She was a little Belgian refugee who had
been sent there with her mother. The mother was dead now, and the
child would not even go to visit her grave. She could not be
coaxed from the court-yard into the quiet street. If the
neighbour children came into the garden on an errand, she hid
herself. She would have no playmates but the cat; and now she had
the kittens in the tool house.

Dinner was very cheerful that evening. M. Joubert was pleased
that the storm had not lasted long enough to hurt the wheat. The
garden was fresh and bright after the rain. The cherry tree shook
down bright drops on the tablecloth when the breeze stirred. The
mother cat dozed on the red cushion in Madame Joubert's sewing
chair, and the pigeons fluttered down to snap up earthworms that
wriggled in the wet sand. The shadow of the house fell over the
dinner-table, but the tree-tops stood up in full sunlight, and
the yellow sun poured on the earth wall and the cream-coloured
roses. Their petals, ruffled by the rain, gave out a wet, spicy
smell.

M. Joubert must have been ten years older than his wife. There
was a great contentment in his manner and a pleasant sparkle in
his eye. He liked the young officers. Gerhardt had been there
more than two weeks, and somewhat relieved the stillness that
had settled over the house since the second son died in hospital.
The Jouberts had dropped out of things. They had done all they
could do, given all they had, and now they had nothing to look
forward to,--except the event to which all France looked forward.
The father was talking to Gerhardt about the great sea-port the
Americans were making of Bordeaux; he said he meant to go there
after the war, to see it all for himself.

Madame Joubert was pleased to hear that they had been walking in
the wood. And was the heather in bloom ? She wished they had
brought her some. Next time they went, perhaps. She used to walk
there often. Her eyes seemed to come nearer to them, Claude
thought, when she spoke of it, and she evidently cared a great
deal more about what was blooming in the wood than about what the
Americans were doing on the Garonne. He wished he could talk to
her as Gerhardt did. He admired the way she roused herself and
tried to interest them, speaking her difficult language with such
spirit and precision. It was a language that couldn't be mumbled;
that had to be spoken with energy and fire, or not spoken at all.
Merely speaking that exacting tongue would help to rally a broken
spirit, he thought.

The little maid who served them moved about noiselessly. Her dull
eyes never seemed to look; yet she saw when it was time to bring
the heavy soup tureen, and when it was time to take it away.
Madame Joubert had found that Claude liked his potatoes with his
meat--when there was meat--and not in a course by themselves. She
had each time to tell the little girl to go and fetch them. This
the child did with manifest reluctance,--sullenly, as if she were
being forced to do something wrong. She was a very strange little
creature, altogether. As the two soldiers left the table and
started for the camp, Claude reached down into the tool house and
took up one of the kittens, holding it out in the light to see it
blink its eyes. The little girl, just coming out of the kitchen,
uttered a shrill scream, a really terrible scream, and squatted
down, covering her face with her hands. Madame Joubert came out
to chide her.

"What is the matter with that child ?" Claude asked as they
hurried out of the gate. "Do you suppose she was hurt, or abused
in some way ?"

"Terrorized. She often screams like that at night. Haven't you
heard her ? They have to go and wake her, to stop it. She doesn't
speak any French; only Walloon. And she can't or won't learn, so
they can't tell what goes on in her poor little head."

In the two weeks of intensive training that followed, Claude
marvelled at Gerhardt's spirit and endurance. The muscular strain
of mimic trench operations was more of a tax on him than on any
of the other officers. He was as tall as Claude, but he weighed
only a hundred and forty-six pounds, and he had not been roughly
bred like most of the others. When his fellow officers learned
that he was a violinist by profession, that he could have had a
soft job as interpreter or as an organizer of camp
entertainments, they no longer resented his reserve or his
occasional superciliousness. They respected a man who could have
wriggled out and didn't.


VII

On the march at last; through a brilliant August day Colonel
Scott's battalion was streaming along one of the dusty,
well-worn roads east of the Somme, their railway base well behind
them. The way led through rolling country; fields, hills, woods,
little villages shattered but still habitable, where the people
came out to watch the soldiers go by.

The Americans went through every village in march step, colours
flying, the band playing, "to show that the morale was high," as
the officers said. Claude trudged on the outside of the
column,--now at the front of his company, now at the
rear,--wearing a stoical countenance, afraid of betraying his
satisfaction in the men, the weather, the country.

They were bound for the big show, and on every hand were
reassuring signs: long lines of gaunt, dead trees, charred and
torn; big holes gashed out in fields and hillsides, already half
concealed by new undergrowth; winding depressions in the earth,
bodies of wrecked motor-trucks and automobiles lying along the
road, and everywhere endless straggling lines of rusty
barbed-wire, that seemed to have been put there by chance,--with
no purpose at all.

"Begins to look like we're getting in, Lieutenant," said Sergeant
Hicks, smiling behind his salute.

Claude nodded and passed forward.

"Well, we can't arrive any too soon for us, boys ?" The Sergeant
looked over his shoulder, and they grinned, their teeth flashing
white in their red, perspiring faces. Claude didn't wonder that
everybody along the route, even the babies, came out to see them;
he thought they were the finest sight in the world. This was the
first day they had worn their tin hats; Gerhardt had shown them
how to stuff grass and leaves inside to keep their heads cool.
When they fell into fours, and the band struck up as they
approached a town, Bert Fuller, the boy from Pleasantville on the
Platte, who had blubbered on the voyage over, was guide right,
and whenever Claude passed him his face seemed to say, "You won't
get anything on me in a hurry, Lieutenant!"

They made camp early in the afternoon, on a hill covered with
half-burned pines. Claude took Bert and Dell Able and Oscar the
Swede, and set off to make a survey and report the terrain.

Behind the hill, under the burned edge of the wood, they found an
abandoned farmhouse and what seemed to be a clean well.

It had a solid stone curb about it, and a wooden bucket hanging
by a rusty wire. When the boys splashed the bucket about, the
water sent up a pure, cool breath. But they were wise boys, and
knew where dead Prussians most loved to hide. Even the straw in
the stable they regarded with suspicion, and thought it would be
just as well not to bed anybody there.

Swinging on to the right to make their circuit, they got into
mud; a low field where the drain ditches had been neglected and
had overflowed. There they came upon a pitiful group of humanity,
bemired. A woman, ill and wretched looking, sat on a fallen log
at the end of the marsh, a baby in her lap and three children
hanging about her. She was far gone in consumption; one had only
to listen to her breathing and to look at her white, perspiring
face to feel how weak she was. Draggled, mud to the knees, she
was trying to nurse her baby, half hidden under an old black
shawl. She didn't look like a tramp woman, but like one who had
once been able to take proper care of herself, and she was still
young. The children were tired and discouraged. One little boy
wore a clumsy blue jacket, made from a French army coat. The
other wore a battered American Stetson that came down over his
ears. He carried, in his two arms, a pink celluloid clock. They
all looked up and waited for the soldiers to do something.

Claude approached the woman, and touching the rim of his helmet,
began: "Bonjour, Madame. Qu'est que c'est ?"

She tried to speak, but went off into a spasm of coughing, only
able to gasp, "'Toinette, 'Toinette!"

'Toinette stepped quickly forward. She was about eleven, and
seemed to be the captain of the party. A bold, hard little face
with a long chin, straight black hair tied with rags, uneasy,
crafty eyes; she looked much less gentle and more experienced
than her mother. She began to explain, and she was very clever at
making herself understood. She was used to talking to foreign
soldiers,--spoke slowly, with emphasis and ingenious gestures.

She, too, had been reconnoitering. She had discovered the empty
farmhouse and was trying to get her party there for the night.
How did they come here ? Oh, they were refugees. They had been
staying with people thirty kilometers from here. They were trying
to get back to their own village. Her mother was very sick,
presque morte and she wanted to go home to die. They had heard
people were still living there; an old aunt was living in their
own cellar,--and so could they if they once got there. The point
was, and she made it over and over, that her mother wished to die
chez elle, comprenez-vous ? They had no papers, and the French
soldiers would never let them pass, but now that the Americans
were here they hoped to get through; the Americans were said to
be toujours gentils.

While she talked in her shrill, clicking voice, the baby began to
howl, dissatisfied with its nourishment. The little girl
shrugged. "Il est toujours en colère," she muttered. The woman
turned it around with difficulty--it seemed a big, heavy baby,
but white and sickly--and gave it the other breast. It began
sucking her noisily, rooting and sputtering as if it were
famished. It was too painful, it was almost indecent, to see this
exhausted woman trying to feed her baby. Claude beckoned his men
away to one side, and taking the little girl by the hand drew her
after them.

"Il faut que votre mère--se reposer," he told her, with the grave
caesural pause which he always made in the middle of a French
sentence. She understood him. No distortion of her native tongue
surprised or perplexed her. She was accustomed to being addressed
in all persons, numbers, genders, tenses; by Germans, English,
Americans. She only listened to hear whether the voice was kind,
and with men in this uniform it usually was kind.

Had they anything to eat ? "Vous avez quelque chose à manger ?"

"Rien. Rien du tout."

Wasn't her mother "trop malade à marcher ?"

She shrugged; Monsieur could see for himself.

And her father ?

He was dead; "mort à la Marne, en quatorze."

"At the Marne ?" Claude repeated, glancing in perplexity at the
nursing baby. Her sharp eyes followed his, and she instantly
divined his doubt. "The baby ?" she said quickly. "Oh, the baby is
not my brother, he is a Boche."

For a moment Claude did not understand. She repeated her
explanation impatiently, something disdainful and sinister in her
metallic little voice. A slow blush mounted to his forehead.

He pushed her toward her mother, "Attendez là."

"I guess we'll have to get them over to that farmhouse," he told
the men. He repeated what he had got of the child's story. When
he came to her laconic statement about the baby, they looked at
each other. Bert Fuller was afraid he might cry again, so he kept
muttering, "By God, if we'd a-got here sooner, by God if we had!"
as they ran back along the ditch.

Dell and Oscar made a chair of their crossed hands and carried
the woman, she was no great weight. Bert picked up the little boy
with the pink clock; "Come along, little frog, your legs ain't
long enough."

Claude walked behind, holding the screaming baby stiffly in his
arms. How was it possible for a baby to have such definite
personality, he asked himself, and how was it possible to dislike
a baby so much ? He hated it for its square, tow-thatched head and
bloodless ears, and carried it with loathing... no wonder it
cried! When it got nothing by screaming and stiffening, however,
it suddenly grew quiet; regarded him with pale blue eyes, and
tried to make itself comfortable against his khaki coat. It put
out a grimy little fist and took hold of one of his buttons.
"Kamerad, eh ?" he muttered, glaring at the infant. "Cut it out!"

Before they had their own supper that night, the boys carried hot
food and blankets down to their family.



VIII

Four o'clock... a summer dawn... his first morning in the
trenches.

Claude had just been along the line to see that the gun teams
were in position. This hour, when the light was changing, was a
favourite time for attack. He had come in late last night, and
had everything to learn. Mounting the firestep, he peeped over
the parapet between the sandbags, into the low, twisting mist.
Just then he could see nothing but the wire entanglement, with
birds hopping along the top wire, singing and chirping as they
did on the wire fences at home. Clear and flute-like they sounded
in the heavy air,--and they were the only sounds. A little breeze
came up, slowly clearing the mist away. Streaks of green showed
through the moving banks of vapour. The birds became more
agitated. That dull stretch of grey and green was No Man's Land.
Those low, zigzag mounds, like giant molehills protected by wire
hurdles, were the Hun trenches; five or six lines of them. He
could easily follow the communication trenches without a glass.
At one point their front line could not be more than eighty yards
away, at another it must be all of three hundred. Here and there
thin columns of smoke began to rise; the Hun was getting
breakfast; everything was comfortable and natural. Behind the
enemy's position the country rose gradually for several miles,
with ravines and little woods, where, according to his map, they
had masked artillery. Back on the hills were ruined farmhouses
and broken trees, but nowhere a living creature in sight. It was
a dead, nerveless countryside, sunk in quiet and dejection. Yet
everywhere the ground was full of men. Their own trenches, from
the other side, must look quite as dead. Life was a secret, these
days.

It was amazing how simply things could be done. His battalion had
marched in quietly at midnight, and the line they came to relieve
had set out as silently for the rear. It all took place in utter
darkness. Just as B Company slid down an incline into the shallow
rear trenches, the country was lit for a moment by two star
shells, there was a rattling of machine guns, German Maxims,--a
sporadic crackle that was not followed up. Filing along the
communication trenches, they listened anxiously; artillery fire
would have made it bad for the other men who were marching to the
rear. But nothing happened. They had a quiet night, and this
morning, here they were!

The sky flamed up saffron and silver. Claude looked at his watch,
but he could not bear to go just yet. How long it took a Wheeler
to get round to anything! Four years on the way; now that he was
here, he would enjoy the scenery a bit, he guessed. He wished his
mother could know how he felt this morning. But perhaps she did
know. At any rate, she would not have him anywhere else. Five
years ago, when he was sitting on the steps of the Denver State
House and knew that nothing unexpected could ever happen to him...
suppose he could have seen, in a flash, where he would be
today ? He cast a long look at the reddening, lengthening
landscape, and dropped down on the duckboard.

Claude made his way back to the dugout into which he and Gerhardt
had thrown their effects last night. The former occupants had
left it clean. There were two bunks nailed against the side
walls,--wooden frames with wire netting over them, covered with
dry sandbags. Between the two bunks was a soap-box table, with a
candle stuck in a green bottle, an alcohol stove, a bainmarie,
and two tin cups. On the wall were coloured pictures from Jugend,
taken out of some Hun trench.

He found Gerhardt still asleep on his bed, and shook him until he
sat up.

"How long have you been out, Claude ? Didn't you sleep ?"

"A little. I wasn't very tired. I suppose we could heat shaving
water on this stove; they've left us half a bottle of alcohol.
It's quite a comfortable little hole, isn't it ?"

"It will doubtless serve its purpose," David remarked dryly. "So
sensitive to any criticism of this war! Why, it's not your
affair; you've only just arrived."

"I know," Claude replied meekly, as he began to fold his
blankets. "But it's likely the only one I'll ever be in, so I may
as well take an interest."

The next afternoon four young men, all more or less naked, were
busy about a shell-hole full of opaque brown water. Sergeant Hicks
and his chum, Dell Able, had hunted through half the blazing hot
morning to find a hole not too scummy, conveniently, and even
picturesquely situated, and had reported it to the Lieutenants.
Captain Maxey, Hicks said, could send his own orderly to find his
own shell-hole, and could take his bath in private. "He'd never
wash himself with anybody else," the Sergeant added. "Afraid of
exposing his dignity!"

Bruger and Hammond, the two second Lieutenants, were already out
of their bath, and reclined on what might almost be termed a
grassy slope, examining various portions of their body with
interest. They hadn't had all their clothes off for some time,
and four days of marching in hot weather made a man anxious to
look at himself.

"You wait till winter," Gerhardt told them. He was still
splashing in the hole, up to his armpits in muddy water. "You
won't get a wash once in three months then. Some of the Tommies
told me that when they got their first bath after Vimy, their
skins peeled off like a snake's. What are you doing with my
trousers, Bruger ?"

"Hunting for your knife. I dropped mine yesterday, when that
shell exploded in the cut-off. I darned near dropped my old nut!"

"Shucks, that wasn't anything. Don't keep blowing about it--shows
you're a greenhorn."

Claude stripped off his shirt and slid into the pool beside
Gerhardt. "Gee, I hit something sharp down there! Why didn't you
fellows pull out the splinters ?"

He shut his eyes, disappeared for a moment, and came up
sputtering, throwing on the ground a round metal object, coated
with rust and full of slime. "German helmet, isn't it ? Phew!" He
wiped his face and looked about suspiciously.

"Phew is right!" Bruger turned the object over with a stick. "Why
in hell didn't you bring up the rest of him ? You've spoiled my
bath. I hope you enjoy it."

Gerhardt scrambled up the side. "Get out, Wheeler! Look at that,"
he pointed to big sleepy bubbles, bursting up through the thick
water. "You've stirred up trouble, all right! Something's going
very bad down there."

Claude got out after him, looking back at the activity in the
water. "I don't see how pulling out one helmet could stir the
bottom up so. I should think the water would keep the smell
down."

"Ever study chemistry ?" Bruger asked scornfully. "You just opened
up a graveyard, and now we get the exhaust. If you swallowed any
of that German cologne--Oh, you should worry!"

Lieutenant Hammond, still barelegged, with his shirt tied over
his shoulders, was scratching in his notebook. Before they left
he put up a placard on a split stick.

No Public Bathing!! Private Beach

C. Wheeler, Co. B. 2-th Inf'ty.

.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

The first letters from home! The supply wagons brought them up,
and every man in the Company got something except Ed Drier, a
farm-hand from the Nebraska sand hills, and Willy Katz, the
tow-headed Austrian boy from the South Omaha packing-houses.
Their comrades were sorry for them. Ed didn't have any "folks" of
his own, but he had expected letters all the same. Willy was sure
his mother must have written. When the last ragged envelope was
given out and he turned away empty-handed, he murmured, "She's
Bohunk, and she don't write so good. I guess the address wasn't
plain, and some fellow in another comp'ny has got my letter."

No second class matter was sent up,--the boys had hoped for
newspapers from home to give them a little war news, since they
never got any here. Dell Able's sister, however, had enclosed a
clipping from the Kansas City Star; a long account by one of the
British war correspondents in Mesopotamia, describing the
hardships the soldiers suffered there; dysentery, flies,
mosquitoes, unimaginable heat. He read this article aloud to a
group of his friends as they sat about a shell-hole pool where
they had been washing their socks. He had just finished the story
of how the Tommies had found a few mud huts at the place where
the original Garden of Eden was said to have been,--a desolate
spot full of stinging insects--when Oscar Petersen, a very
religious Swedish boy who was often silent for days together,
opened his mouth and said scornfully,

"That's a lie!"

Dell looked up at him, annoyed by the interruption. "How do you
know it is ?"

"Because; the Lord put four cherubims with swords to guard the
Garden, and there ain't no man going to find it. It ain't
intended they should. The Bible says so."

Hicks began to laugh. "Why, that was about six thousand years
ago, you cheese! Do you suppose your cherubims are still there ?"

"'Course they are. What's a thousand years to a cherubim ?
Nothin'!"

The Swede rose and sullenly gathered up his socks.

Dell Able looked at his chum. "Ain't he the complete bonehead ?
Solid ivory!"

Oscar wouldn't listen further to a "pack of lies" and walked off
with his washing.

.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

Battalion Headquarters was nearly half a mile behind the front
line, part dugout, part shed, with a plank roof sodded over. The
Colonel's office was partitioned off at one end; the rest of the
place he gave over to the officers for a kind of club room. One
night Claude went back to make a report on the new placing of the
gun teams. The young officers were sitting about on soap boxes,
smoking and eating sweet crackers out of tin cases. Gerhardt was
working at a plank table with paper and crayons, making a clean
copy of a rough map they had drawn up together that morning,
showing the limits of fire. Noise didn't fluster him; he could
sit among a lot of men and write as calmly as if he were alone.

There was one officer who could talk all the others down,
wherever he was; Captain Barclay Owens, attached from the
Engineers. He was a little stumpy thumb of a man, only five feet
four, and very broad,--a dynamo of energy. Before the war he was
building a dam in Spain, "the largest dam in the world," and in
his excavations he had discovered the ruins of one of Julius
Caesar's fortified camps. This had been too much for his
easily-inflamed imagination. He photographed and measured and
brooded upon these ancient remains. He was an engineer by day and
an archaeologist by night. He had crates of books sent down from
Paris,--everything that had been written on Caesar, in French and
German; he engaged a young priest to translate them aloud to him
in the evening. The priest believed the American was mad.

When Owens was in college he had never shown the least interest
in classical studies, but now it was as if he were giving birth
to Caesar. The war came along, and stopped the work on his dam.
It also drove other ideas into his exclusively engineering
brains. He rushed home to Kansas to explain the war to his
countrymen.. He travelled about the West, demonstrating exactly
what had happened at the first battle of the Marne, until he had
a chance to enlist.

In the Battalion, Owens was called "Julius Caesar," and the men
never knew whether he was explaining the Roman general's
operations in Spain, or Joffre's at the Marne, he jumped so from
one to the other. Everything was in the foreground with him;
centuries made no difference. Nothing existed until Barclay Owens
found out about it. The men liked to hear him talk. Tonight he
was walking up and down, his yellow eyes rolling, a big black
cigar in his hand, lecturing the young officers upon French
characteristics, coaching and preparing them. It was his legs
that made him so funny; his trunk was that of a big man, set on
two short stumps.

"Now you fellows don't want to forget that the night-life of
Paris is not a typical thing at all; that's a show got up for
foreigners.... The French peasant, he's a thrifty fellow....
This red wine's all right if you don't abuse it; take it
two-thirds water and it keeps off dysentery.... You don't
have to be rough with them, simply firm. Whenever one of them
accosts me, I follow a regular plan; first, I give her
twenty-five francs; then I look her in the eye and say, 'My girl,
I've got three children, three boys.' She gets the point at once;
never fails. She goes away ashamed of herself."

"But that's so expensive! It must keep you poor, Captain Owens,"
said young Lieutenant Hammond innocently. The others roared.

Claude knew that David particularly detested Captain Owens of the
Engineers, and wondered that he could go on working with such
concentration, when snatches of the Captain's lecture kept
breaking through the confusion of casual talk and the noise of
the phonograph. Owens, as he walked up and down, cast furtive
glances at Gerhardt. He had got wind of the fact that there was
something out of the ordinary about him.

The men kept the phonograph going; as soon as one record buzzed
out, somebody put in another. Once, when a new tune began, Claude
saw David look up from his paper with a curious expression. He
listened for a moment with a half-contemptuous smile, then
frowned and began sketching in his map again. Something about his
momentary glance of recognition made Claude wonder whether he had
particular associations with the air,--melancholy, but beautiful,
Claude thought. He got up and went over to change the record
himself this time. He took out the disk, and holding it up to the
light, read the inscription:

"Meditation from Thais--Violin solo--David Gerhardt."

When they were going back along the communication trench in the
rain, wading single file, Claude broke the silence abruptly.
"That was one of your records they played tonight, that violin
solo, wasn't it ?"

"Sounded like it. Now we go to the right. I always get lost
here."

"Are there many of your records ?"

"Quite a number. Why do you ask ?"

"I'd like to write my mother. She's fond of good music. She'll
get your records, and it will sort of bring the whole thing
closer to her, don't you see ?"

"All right, Claude," said David good-naturedly. "She will find
them in the catalogue, with my picture in uniform alongside. I
had a lot made before I went out to Camp Dix. My own mother gets
a little income from them. Here we are, at home." As he struck a
match two black shadows jumped from the table and disappeared
behind the blankets. "Plenty of them around, these wet nights.
Get one ? Don't squash him in there. Here's the sack."

Gerhardt held open the mouth of a gunny sack, and Claude thrust
the squirming corner of his blanket into it and vigorously
trampled whatever fell to the bottom. "Where do you suppose the
other is ?" "He'll join us later. I don't mind the rats half so
much as I do Barclay Owens. What a sight he would be with his
clothes off! Turn in; I'll go the rounds." Gerhardt splashed out
along the submerged duckboard. Claude took off his shoes and
cooled his feet in the muddy water. He wished he could ever get
David to talk about his profession, and wondered what he looked
like on a concert platform, playing his violin.



IX

The following night, Claude was sent back to Division
Head-quarters at Q-- with information the Colonel did not care to
commit to paper. He set off at ten o'clock, with Sergeant Hicks
for escort. There had been two days of rain, and the
communication trenches were almost knee-deep in water. About half
a mile back of the front line, the two men crawled out of the
ditch and went on above ground. There was very little shelling
along the front that night. When a flare went up, they dropped
and lay on their faces, trying, at the same time, to get a squint
at what was ahead of them.

The ground was rough, and the darkness thick; it was past
midnight when they reached the east-and-west road--usually full
of traffic, and not entirely deserted even on a night like this.
Trains of horses were splashing through the mud, with shells on
their backs, empty supply wagons were coming back from the front.
Claude and Hicks paused by the ditch, hoping to get a ride. The
rain began to fall with such violence that they looked about for
shelter. Stumbling this way and that, they ran into a big
artillery piece, the wheels sunk over the hubs in a mud-hole.

"Who's there ?" called a quick voice, unmistakably British.

"American infantrymen, two of us. Can we get onto one of your
trucks till this lets up ?"

"Oh, certainly! We can make room for you in here, if you're not
too big. Speak quietly, or you'll waken the Major." Giggles and
smothered laughter; a flashlight winked for a moment and showed a
line of five trucks, the front and rear ones covered with
tarpaulin tents. The voices came from the shelter next the gun.
The men inside drew up their legs and made room for the
strangers; said they were sorry they hadn't anything dry to offer
them except a little rum. The intruders accepted this gratefully.

The Britishers were a giggly lot, and Claude thought, from their
voices, they must all be very young. They joked about their Major
as if he were their schoolmaster. There wasn't room enough on the
truck for anybody to lie down, so they sat with their knees under
their chins and exchanged gossip. The gun team belonged to an
independent battery that was sent about over the country,
"wherever needed." The rest of the battery had got through, gone
on to the east, but this big gun was always getting into trouble;
now something had gone wrong with her tractor and they couldn't
pull her out. They called her "Jenny," and said she was taken
with fainting fits now and then, and had to be humoured. It was
like going about with your grandmother, one of the invisible
Tommies said, "she is such a pompous old thing!" The Major was
asleep on the rear truck; he was going to get the V.C. for
sleeping. More giggles.

No, they hadn't any idea where they were going; of course, the
officers knew, but artillery officers never told anything. What
was this country like, anyhow ? They were new to this part, had
just come down from Verdure.

Claude said he had a friend in the air service up there; did they
happen to know anything about Victor Morse ?

Morse, the American ace ? Hadn't he heard ? Why, that got into the
London papers. Morse was shot down inside the Hun line three
weeks ago. It was a brilliant affair. He was chased by eight
Boche planes, brought down three of them, put the rest to flight,
and was making for base, when they turned and got him. His
machine came down in flames and he jumped, fell a thousand feet
or more.

"Then I suppose he never got his leave ?" Claude asked.

They didn't know. He got a fine citation.

The men settled down to wait for the weather to improve or the
night to pass. Some of them fell into a doze, but Claude felt
wide awake. He was wondering about the flat in Chelsea; whether
the heavy-eyed beauty had been very sorry, or whether she was
playing "Roses of Picardy" for other young officers. He thought
mournfully that he would never go to London now. He had quite
counted on meeting Victor there some day, after the Kaiser had
been properly disposed of. He had really liked Victor. There was
something about that fellow... a sort of debauched baby, he
was, who went seeking his enemy in the clouds. What other age
could have produced such a figure ? That was one of the things
about this war; it took a little fellow from a little town, gave
him an air and a swagger, a life like a movie-film,--and then a
death like the rebel angels.

A man like Gerhardt, for instance, had always lived in a more or
less rose-colored world; he belonged over here, really. How could
he know what hard moulds and crusts the big guns had broken open
on the other side of the sea ? Who could ever make him understand
how far it was from the strawberry bed and the glass cage in the
bank, to the sky-roads over Verdure ?

By three o'clock the rain had stopped. Claude and Hicks set off
again, accompanied by one of the gun team who was going back to
get help for their tractor. As it began to grow light, the two
Americans wondered more and more at the extremely youthful
appearance of their companion. When they stopped at a shell-hole
and washed the mud from their faces, the English boy, with his
helmet off and the weather stains removed, showed a countenance
of adolescent freshness, almost girlish; cheeks like pink apples,
yellow curls above his forehead, long, soft lashes.

"You haven't been over very long, have you ?" Claude asked in a
fatherly tone, as they took the road again.

"I came out in 'sixteen. I was formerly in the infantry."

The Americans liked to hear him talk; he spoke very quickly, in a
high, piping voice.

"How did you come to change ?"

"Oh, I belonged to one of the Pal Battalions, and we got cut to
pieces. When I came out of hospital, I thought I'd try another
branch of the service, seeing my pals were gone."

"Now, just what is a Pal Battalion ?" drawled Hicks. He hated all
English words he didn't understand, though he didn't mind French
ones in the least.

"Fellows who signed up together from school," the lad piped.

Hicks glanced at Claude. They both thought this boy ought to be
in school for some time yet, and wondered what he looked like
when he first came over.

"And you got cut up, you say ?" he asked sympathetically.

"Yes, on the Somme. We had rotten luck. We were sent over to take
a trench and couldn't. We didn't even get to the wire. The Hun
was so well prepared that time, we couldn't manage it. We went
over a thousand, and we came back seventeen."

"A hundred and seventeen ?"

"No, seventeen."

Hicks whistled and again exchanged looks with Claude. They could
neither of them doubt him. There was something very unpleasant
about the idea of a thousand fresh-faced schoolboys being sent
out against the guns. "It must have been a fool order," he
commented. "Suppose there was some mistake at Headquarters ?"

"Oh, no, Headquarters knew what it was about! We'd have taken it,
if we'd had any sort of luck. But the Hun happened to be full of
fight. His machine guns did for us."

"You were hit yourself ?" Claude asked him.

"In the leg. He was popping away at me all the while, but I
wriggled back on my tummy. When I came out of the hospital my leg
wasn't strong, and there's less marching in the artillery.

"I should think you'd have had about enough."

"Oh, a fellow can't stay out after all his chums have been
killed! He'd think about it all the time, you know," the boy
replied in his clear treble.

Claude and Hicks got into Headquarters just as the cooks were
turning out to build their fires. One of the Corporals took them
to the officers' bath,--a shed with big tin tubs, and carried away
their uniforms to dry them in the kitchen. It would be an hour
before the officers would be about, he said, and in the meantime
he would manage to get clean shirts and socks for them.

"Say, Lieutenant," Hicks brought out as he was rubbing himself
down with a real bath towel, "I don't want to hear any more about
those Pal Battalions, do you ? It gets my goat. So long as we were
going to get into this, we might have been a little more
previous. I hate to feel small." "Guess we'll have to take our
medicine," Claude said dryly, "There wasn't anywhere to duck, was
there ? I felt like it. Nice little kid. I don't believe American
boys ever seem as young as that."

"Why, if you met him anywhere else, you'd be afraid of using bad
words before him, he's so pretty! What's the use of sending an
orphan asylum out to be slaughtered ? I can't see it," grumbled
the fat sergeant. "Well, it's their business. I'm not going to
let it spoil my breakfast. Suppose we'll draw ham and eggs,
Lieutenant ?"



X

After breakfast Claude reported to Headquarters and talked with
one of the staff Majors. He was told he would have to wait until
tomorrow to see Colonel James, who had been called to Paris for a
general conference. He had left in his car at four that morning,
in response to a telephone message.

"There's not much to do here, by way of amusement," said the
Major. "A movie show tonight, and you can get anything you want
at the estaminet,--the one on the square, opposite the English
tank, is the best. There are a couple of nice Frenchwomen in the
Red Cross barrack, up on the hill, in the old convent garden.
They try to look out for the civilian population, and we're on
good terms with them. We get their supplies through with our own,
and the quartermaster has orders to help them when they run
short. You might go up and call on them. They speak English
perfectly."

Claude asked whether he could walk in on them without any kind of
introduction.

"Oh, yes, they're used to us! I'll give you a card to Mlle.
Olive, though. She's a particular friend of mine. There you are:
'Mlle. Olive de Courcy, introducing, etc.' And, you understand,"
here he glanced up and looked Claude over from head to foot,
"she's a perfect lady."

Even with an introduction, Claude felt some hesitancy about
presenting himself to these ladies. Perhaps they didn't like
Americans; he was always afraid of meeting French people who
didn't. It was the same way with most of the fellows in his
battalion, he had found; they were terribly afraid of being
disliked. And the moment they felt they were disliked, they
hastened to behave as badly as possible, in order to deserve it;
then they didn't feel that they had been taken in--the worst
feeling a doughboy could possibly have!

Claude thought he would stroll about to look at the town a
little. It had been taken by the Germans in the autumn of 1914,
after their retreat from the Marne, and they had held it until
about a year ago, when it was retaken by the English and the
Chasseurs d'Alpins. They had been able to reduce it and to drive
the Germans out, only by battering it down with artillery; not
one building remained standing.

Ruin was ugly, and it was nothing more, Claude was thinking, as
he followed the paths that ran over piles of brick and plaster.
There was nothing picturesque about this, as there was in the war
pictures one saw at home. A cyclone or a fire might have done
just as good a job. The place was simply a great dump-heap; an
exaggeration of those which disgrace the outskirts of American
towns. It was the same thing over and over; mounds of burned
brick and broken stone, heaps of rusty, twisted iron, splintered
beams and rafters, stagnant pools, cellar holes full of muddy
water. An American soldier had stepped into one of those holes a
few nights before, and been drowned.

This had been a rich town of eighteen thousand inhabitants; now
the civilian population was about four hundred. There were people
there who had hung on all through the years of German occupation;
others who, as soon as they heard that the enemy was driven out,
came back from wherever they had found shelter. They were living
in cellars, or in little wooden barracks made from old timbers
and American goods boxes. As he walked along, Claude read
familiar names and addresses, painted on boards built into the
sides of these frail shelters: "From Emery Bird, Thayer Co.
Kansas City, Mo." "Daniels and Fisher, Denver, Colo." These
inscriptions cheered him so much that he began to feel like going
up and calling on the French ladies.

The sun had come out hot after three days of rain. The stagnant
pools and the weeds that grew in the ditches gave out a rank,
heavy smell. Wild flowers grew triumphantly over the piles of
rotting wood and rusty iron; cornflowers and Queen Anne's lace
and poppies; blue and white and red, as if the French colours
came up spontaneously out of the French soil, no matter what the
Germans did to it.

Claude paused before a little shanty built against a
half-demolished brick wall. A gilt cage hung in the doorway, with
a canary, singing beautifully. An old woman was working in the
garden patch, picking out bits of brick and plaster the rain had
washed up, digging with her fingers around the pale carrot-tops
and neat lettuce heads. Claude approached her, touched his
helmet, and asked her how one could find the way to the Red
Cross.

She wiped her hands on her apron and took him by the elbow. "Vous
savez le tank Anglais ? Non ? Marie, Marie!"

(He learned afterward that every one was directed to go this way
or that from a disabled British tank that had been left on the
site of the old town hall.)

A little girl ran out of the barrack, and her grandmother told
her to go at once and take the American to the Red Cross. Marie
put her hand in Claude's and led him off along one of the paths
that wound among the rubbish. She took him out of the way to show
him a church,--evidently one of the ruins of which they were
proudest,--where the blue sky was shining through the white
arches. The Virgin stood with empty arms over the central door; a
little foot sticking to her robe showed where the infant Jesus
had been shot away.

"Le bébé est cassé, mais il a protégé sa mère," Marie explained
with satisfaction. As they went on, she told Claude that she had
a soldier among the Americans who was her friend. "Il est bon, il
est gai, mon soldat," but he sometimes drank too much alcohol,
and that was a bad habit. Perhaps now, since his comrade had
stepped into a cellar hole Monday night while he was drunk, and
had been drowned, her "Sharlie" would be warned and would do
better. Marie was evidently a well brought up child. Her father,
she said, had been a schoolmaster. At the foot of the convent
hill, she turned to go home. Claude called her back and awkwardly
tried to give her some money, but she thrust her hands behind her
and said resolutely, "Non, merci. Je n'ai besoin de rien," and
then ran away down the path.

As he climbed toward the top of the hill he noticed that the
ground had been cleaned up a bit. The path was clear, the bricks
and hewn stones had been piled in neat heaps, the broken hedges
had been trimmed and the dead parts cut away. Emerging at last
into the garden, he stood still for wonder; even though it was in
ruins, it seemed so beautiful after the disorder of the world
below.

The gravel walks were clean and shining. A wall of very old
boxwoods stood green against a row of dead Lombardy poplars.
Along the shattered side of the main building, a pear tree,
trained on wires like a vine, still flourished,--full of little
red pears. Around the stone well was a shaven grass plot, and
everywhere there were little trees and shrubs, which had been too
low for the shells to hit,--or for the fire, which had seared the
poplars, to catch. The hill must have been wrapped in flames at
one time, and all the tall trees had been burned.

The barrack was built against the walls of the cloister,--three
arches of which remained, like a stone wing to the shed of
planks. On a ladder stood a one-armed young man, driving nails
very skillfully with his single hand. He seemed to be making a
frame projection from the sloping roof, to support an awning. He
carried his nails in his mouth. When he wanted one, he hung his
hammer to the belt of his trousers, took a nail from between his
teeth, stuck it into the wood, and then deftly rapped it on the
head. Claude watched him for a moment, then went to the foot of
the ladder and held out his two hands. "Laissez-moi," he
exclaimed.

The one aloft spat his nails out into his palm, looked down, and
laughed. He was about Claude's age, with very yellow hair and
moustache and blue eyes. A charming looking fellow.

"Willingly," he said. "This is no great affair, but I do it to
amuse myself, and it will be pleasant for the ladies." He
descended and gave his hammer to the visitor. Claude set to work
on the frame, while the other went under the stone arches and
brought back a roll of canvas,--part of an old tent, by the look
of it.

"Un héritage des Boches," he explained unrolling it upon the
grass. "I found it among their filth in the cellar, and had the
idea to make a pavilion for the ladies, as our trees are
destroyed." He stood up suddenly. "Perhaps you have come to see
the ladies ?"

"Plus tard."

Very well, the boy said, they would get the pavilion done for a
surprise for Mlle. Olive when she returned. She was down in the
town now, visiting the sick people. He bent over his canvas
again, measuring and cutting with a pair of garden shears, moving
round the green plot on his knees, and all the time singing.
Claude wished he could understand the words of his song.

While they were working together, tying the cloth up to the
frame, Claude, from his elevation, saw a tall girl coming slowly
up the path by which he had ascended. She paused at the top, by
the boxwood hedge, as if she were very tired, and stood looking
at them. Presently she approached the ladder and said in slow,
careful English, "Good morning. Louis has found help, I see."

Claude came down from his perch.

"Are you Mlle. de Courcy ? I am Claude Wheeler. I have a note of
introduction to you, if I can find it."

She took the card, but did not look at it. "That is not
necessary. Your uniform is enough. Why have you come ?"

He looked at her in some confusion. "Well, really, I don't know!
I am just in from the front to see Colonel James, and he is in
Paris, so I must wait over a day. One of the staff suggested my
coming up here--I suppose because it is so nice!" he finished
ingenuously.

"Then you are a guest from the front, and you will have lunch
with Louis and me. Madame Barre is also gone for the day. Will you
see our house ?" She led him through the low door into a living
room, unpainted, uncarpeted, light and airy. There were coloured
war posters on the clean board walls, brass shell cases full of
wild flowers and garden flowers, canvas camp-chairs, a shelf of
books, a table covered by a white silk shawl embroidered with big
butterflies. The sunlight on the floor, the bunches of fresh
flowers, the white window curtains stirring in the breeze,
reminded Claude of something, but he could not remember what.

"We have no guest room," said Mlle. de Courcy. "But you will come
to mine, and Louis will bring you hot water to wash."

In a wooden chamber at the end of the passage, Claude took off
his coat, and set to work to make himself as tidy as possible.
Hot water and scented soap were in themselves pleasant things.
The dresser was an old goods box, stood on end and covered with
white lawn. On it there was a row of ivory toilet things, with
combs and brushes, powder and cologne, and a pile of white
handkerchiefs fresh from the iron. He felt that he ought not to
look about him much, but the odor of cleanness, and the
indefinable air of personality, tempted him. In one corner, a
curtain on a rod made a clothes-closet; in another was a low iron
bed, like a soldier's, with a pale blue coverlid and white
pillows. He moved carefully and splashed discreetly. There was
nothing he could have damaged or broken, not even a rug on the
plank floor, and the pitcher and hand-basin were of iron; yet he
felt as if he were imperiling something fragile.

When he came out, the table in the living room was set for three.
The stout old dame who was placing the plates paid no attention
to him,--seemed, from her expression, to scorn him and all his
kind. He withdrew as far as possible out of her path and picked
up a book from the table, a volume of Heine's Reisebilder in
German.

Before lunch Mlle. de Courcy showed him the store room in the
rear, where the shelves were stocked with rows of coffee tins,
condensed milk, canned vegetables and meat, all with American
trade names he knew so well; names which seemed doubly familiar
and "reliable" here, so far from home. She told him the people in
the town could not have got through the winter without these
things. She had to deal them out sparingly, where the need was
greatest, but they made the difference between life and death.
Now that it was summer, the people lived by their gardens; but
old women still came to beg for a few ounces of coffee, and
mothers to get a can of milk for the babies.

Claude's face glowed with pleasure. Yes, his country had a long
arm. People forgot that; but here, he felt, was some one who did
not forget. When they sat down to lunch he learned that Mlle. de
Courcy and Madame Barre had been here almost a year now; they
came soon after the town was retaken, when the old inhabitants
began to drift back. The people brought with them only what they
could carry in their arms.

"They must love their country so much, don't you think, when they
endure such poverty to come back to it ?" she said. "Even the old
ones do not often complain about their dear things--their linen,
and their china, and their beds. If they have the ground, and
hope, all that they can make again. This war has taught us all
how little the made things matter. Only the feeling matters."

Exactly so; hadn't he been trying to say this ever since he was
born ? Hadn't he always known it, and hadn't it made life both
bitter and sweet for him ? What a beautiful voice she had, this
Mlle. Olive, and how nobly it dealt with the English tongue. He
would like to say something, but out of so much... what ? He
remained silent, therefore, sat nervously breaking up the black
war bread that lay beside his plate.

He saw her looking at his hand, felt in a flash that she regarded
it with favour, and instantly put it on his knee, under the
table.

"It is our trees that are worst," she went on sadly. "You have
seen our poor trees ? It makes one ashamed for this beautiful part
of France. Our people are more sorry for them than to lose their
cattle and horses."

Mlle. de Courcy looked over-taxed by care and responsibility,
Claude thought, as he watched her. She seemed far from strong.
Slender, grey-eyed, dark-haired, with white transparent skin and a
too ardent colour in her lips and cheeks,--like the flame of a
feverish activity within. Her shoulders drooped, as if she were
always tired. She must be young, too, though there were threads
of grey in her hair,--brushed flat and knotted carelessly at the
back of her head.

After the coffee, Mlle. de Courcy went to work at her desk, and
Louis took Claude to show him the garden. The clearing and
trimming and planting were his own work, and he had done it all
with one arm. This autumn he would accomplish much more, for he
was stronger now, and he had the habitude of working
single-handed. He must manage to get the dead trees down; they
distressed Mademoiselle Olive. In front of the barrack stood four
old locusts; the tops were naked forks, burned coal-black, but
the lower branches had put out thick tufts of yellow-green
foliage, so vigorous that the life in the trunks must still be
sound. This fall, Louis said, he meant to get some strong
American boys to help him, and they would saw off the dead limbs
and trim the tops flat over the thick boles. How much it must
mean to a man to love his country like this, Claude thought; to
love its trees and flowers; to nurse it when it was sick, and
tend its hurts with one arm. Among the flowers, which had come
back self-sown or from old roots, Claude found a group of tall,
straggly plants with reddish stems and tiny white blossoms,--one
of the evening primrose family, the Gaura, that grew along the
clay banks of Lovely Creek, at home. He had never thought it very
pretty, but he was pleased to find it here. He had supposed it
was one of those nameless prairie flowers that grew on the
prairie and nowhere else.

When they went back to the barrack, Mlle. Olive was sitting in
one of the canvas chairs Louis had placed under the new pavilion.

"What a fine fellow he is!" Claude exclaimed, looking after him.

"Louis ? Yes. He was my brother's orderly. When Emile came home on
leave he always brought Louis with him, and Louis became like one
of the family. The shell that killed my brother tore off his arm.
My mother and I went to visit him in the hospital, and he seemed
ashamed to be alive, poor boy, when my brother was dead. He put
his hand over his face and began to cry, and said, 'Oh, Madame,
il était toujours plus chic que moi!'"

Although Mlle. Olive spoke English well, Claude saw that she did
so only by keeping her mind intently upon it. The stiff sentences
she uttered were foreign to her nature; her face and eyes ran
ahead of her tongue and made one wait eagerly for what was
coming. He sat down in a sagging canvas chair, absently twisting
a sprig of Gaura he had pulled.

"You have found a flower ?" She looked up.

"Yes. It grows at home, on my father's farm."

She dropped the faded shirt she was darning. "Oh, tell me about
your country! I have talked to so many, but it is difficult to
understand. Yes, tell me about that!"

Nebraska--What was it ? How many days from the sea, what did it
look like ? As he tried to describe it, she listened with
half-closed eyes. "Flat-covered with grain-muddy rivers. I think
it must be like Russia. But your father's farm; describe that to
me, minutely, and perhaps I can see the rest."

Claude took a stick and drew a square in the sand: there, to
begin with, was the house and farmyard; there was the big
pasture, with Lovely Creek flowing through it; there were the
wheatfields and cornfields, the timber claim; more wheat and
corn, more pastures. There it all was, diagrammed on the yellow
sand, with shadows gliding over it from the half-charred locust
trees. He would not have believed that he could tell a stranger
about it in such detail. It was partly due to his listener, no
doubt; she gave him unusual sympathy, and the glow of an unusual
mind. While she bent over his map, questioning him, a light dew
of perspiration gathered on her upper lip, and she breathed
faster from her effort to see and understand everything. He told
her about his mother and his father and Mahailey; what life was
like there in summer and winter and autumn--what it had been like
in that fateful summer when the Hun was moving always toward
Paris, and on those three days when the French were standing at
the Marne; how his mother and father waited for him to bring the
news at night, and how the very cornfields seemed to hold their
breath.

Mlle. Olive sank back wearily in her chair. Claude looked up and
saw tears sparkling in her brilliant eyes. "And I myself," she
murmured, "did not know of the Marne until days afterward, though
my father and brother were both there! I was far off in Brittany,
and the trains did not run. That is what is wonderful, that you
are here, telling me this! We, we were taught from childhood that
some day the Germans would come; we grew up under that threat.
But you were so safe, with all your wheat and corn. Nothing could
touch you, nothing!"

Claude dropped his eyes. "Yes," he muttered, blushing, "shame
could. It pretty nearly did. We are pretty late." He rose from
his chair as if he were going to fetch something.... But
where was he to get it from ? He shook his head. "I am afraid," he
said mournfully, "there is nothing I can say to make you
understand how far away it all seemed, how almost visionary. It
didn't only seem miles away, it seemed centuries away."

"But you do come,--so many, and from so far! It is the last
miracle of this war. I was in Paris on the fourth day of July,
when your Marines, just from Belleau Wood, marched for your
national fete, and I said to myself as they came on, 'That is a
new man!' Such heads they had, so fine there, behind the ears.
Such discipline and purpose. Our people laughed and called to
them and threw them flowers, but they never turned to look...
eyes straight before. They passed like men of destiny." She threw
out her hands with a swift movement and dropped them in her lap.
The emotion of that day came back in her face. As Claude looked
at her burning cheeks, her burning eyes, he understood that the
strain of this war had given her a perception that was almost
like a gift of prophecy.

A woman came up the hill carrying a baby. Mlle. de Courcy went to
meet her and took her into the house. Claude sat down again,
almost lost to himself in the feeling of being completely
understood, of being no longer a stranger. In the far distance
the big guns were booming at intervals. Down in the garden Louis
was singing. Again he wished he knew the words of Louis' songs.
The airs were rather melancholy, but they were sung very
cheerfully. There was something open and warm about the boy's
voice, as there was about his face-something blond, too. It was
distinctly a bland voice, like summer wheatfields, ripe and
waving. Claude sat alone for half an hour or more, tasting a new
kind of happiness, a new kind of sadness. Ruin and new birth; the
shudder of ugly things in the past, the trembling image of
beautiful ones on the horizon; finding and losing; that was life,
he saw.

When his hostess came back, he moved her chair for her out of the
creeping sunlight. "I didn't know there were any French girls
like you," he said simply, as she sat down.

She smiled. "I do not think there are any French girls left.
There are children and women. I was twenty-one when the war came,
and I had never been anywhere without my mother or my brother or
sister. Within a year I went all over France alone; with
soldiers, with Senegalese, with anybody. Everything is different
with us." She lived at Versailles, she told him, where her father
had been an instructor in the Military School. He had died since
the beginning of the war. Her grandfather was killed in the war
of 1870. Hers was a family of soldiers, but not one of the men
would be left to see the day of victory.

She looked so tired that Claude knew he had no right to stay.
Long shadows were falling in the garden. It was hard to leave;
but an hour more or less wouldn't matter. Two people could hardly
give each other more if they were together for years, he thought.

"Will you tell me where I can come and see you, if we both get
through this war ?" he asked as he rose.

He wrote it down in his notebook.

"I shall look for you," she said, giving him her hand.

There was nothing to do but to take his helmet and go. At the
edge of the hill, just before he plunged down the path, he
stopped and glanced back at the garden lying flattened in the
sun; the three stone arches, the dahlias and marigolds, the
glistening boxwood wall. He had left something on the hilltop
which he would never find again.

The next afternoon Claude and his sergeant set off for the front.
They had been told at Headquarters that they could shorten their
route by following the big road to the military cemetery, and
then turning to the left. It was not advisable to go the latter
half of the way before nightfall, so they took their time through
the belt of straggling crops and hayfields.

When they struck the road they came upon a big Highlander sitting
in the end of an empty supply wagon, smoking a pipe and rubbing
the dried mud out of his kilts. The horses were munching in their
nose-bags, and the driver had disappeared. The Americans hadn't
happened to meet with any Highlanders before, and were curious.
This one must be a good fighter, they thought; a brawny giant
with a bulldog jaw, and a face as red and knobby as his knees.
More because he admired the looks of the man than because he
needed information, Hicks went up and asked him if he had noticed
a military cemetery on the road back. The Kilt nodded.

"About how far back would you say it was ?"

"I wouldn't say at all. I take no account of their kilometers,"
he replied dryly, rubbing away at his skirt as if he had it in a
washtub.

"Well, about how long will it take us to walk it ?"

"That I couldn't say. A Scotsman would do it in an hour."

"I guess a Yankee can do it as quick as a Scotchman, can't be ?"
Hicks asked jovially.

"That I couldn't say. You've been four years gettin' this far, I
know verra well."

Hicks blinked as if he had been hit. "Oh, if that's the way you
talk--"

"That's the way I do," said the other sourly.

Claude put out a warning hand. "Come on, Hicks. You'll get
nothing by it." They went up the road very much disconcerted.
Hicks kept thinking of things he might have said. When he was
angry, the Sergeant's forehead puffed up and became dark red,
like a young baby's. "What did you call me off for ?" he
sputtered.

"I don't see where you'd have come out in an argument, and you
certainly couldn't have licked him."

They turned aside at the cemetery to wait until the sun went
down. It was unfenced, unsodded, and a wagon trail ran through
the middle, bisecting the square. On one side were the French
graves, with white crosses; on the other side the German graves,
with black crosses. Poppies and cornflower ran over them. The
Americans strolled about, reading the names. Here and there the
soldier's photograph was nailed upon his cross, left by some
comrade to perpetuate his memory a little longer.

The birds, that always came to life at dusk and dawn, began to
sing, flying home from somewhere. Claude and Hicks sat down
between the mounds and began to smoke while the sun dropped.
Lines of dead trees marked the red west. This was a dreary
stretch of country, even to boys brought up on the flat prairie.
They smoked in silence, meditating and waiting for night. On a
cross at their feet the inscription read merely: Soldat Inconnu,
Mort pour La France.

A very good epitaph, Claude was thinking. Most of the boys who
fell in this war were unknown, even to themselves. They were too
young. They died and took their secret with them,--what they were
and what they might have been. The name that stood was La France.
How much that name had come to mean to him, since he first saw a
shoulder of land bulk up in the dawn from the deck of the
Anchises. It was a pleasant name to say over in one's mind, where
one could make it as passionately nasal as one pleased and never
blush.

Hicks, too, had been lost in his reflections. Now he broke the
silence. "Somehow, Lieutenant, 'mort' seems deader than 'dead.'
It has a coffinish sound. And over there they're all 'tod,' and
it's all the same damned silly thing. Look at them set out here,
black and white, like a checkerboard. The next question is, who
put 'em here, and what's the good of it ?"

"Search me," the other murmured absently.

Hicks rolled another cigarette and sat smoking it, his plump face
wrinkled with the gravity and labour of his cerebration. "Well,"
he brought out at last, "we'd better hike. This afterglow will
hang on for an hour,--always does, over here."

"I suppose we had." They rose to go. The white crosses were now
violet, and the black ones had altogether melted in the shadow.
Behind the dead trees in the west, a long smear of red still
burned. To the north, the guns were tuning up with a deep
thunder. "Somebody's getting peppered up there. Do owls always
hoot in graveyards ?"

"Just what I was wondering, Lieutenant. It's a peaceful spot,
otherwise. Good-night, boys," said Hicks kindly, as they left the
graves behind them.

They were soon finding their way among shell holes, and jumping
trench-tops in the dark,-beginning to feel cheerful at getting
back to their chums and their own little group. Hicks broke out
and told Claude how he and Dell Able meant to go into business
together when they got home; were going to open a garage and
automobile-repair shop. Under their talk, in the minds of both,
that lonely spot lingered, and the legend: Soldat Inconnu, Mort
pour La France.


XI

After four days' rest in the rear, the Battalion went to the
front again in new country, about ten kilometers east of the
trench they had relieved before. One morning Colonel Scott sent
for Claude and Gerhardt and spread his maps out on the table.

"We are going to clean them out there in F 6 tonight, and
straighten our line. The thing that bothers us is that little
village stuck up on the hill, where the enemy machine guns have a
strong position. I want to get them out of there before the
Battalion goes over. We can't spare too many men, and I don't
like to send out more officers than I can help; it won't do to
reduce the Battalion for the major operation. Do you think you
two boys could manage it with a hundred men ? The point is, you
will have to be out and back before our artillery begins at three
o'clock."

Under the hill where the village stood, ran a deep ravine, and
from this ravine a twisting water course wound up the hillside.
By climbing this gully, the raiders should be able to fall on the
machine gunners from the rear and surprise them. But first they
must get across the open stretch, nearly one and a half
kilometers wide, between the American line and the ravine,
without attracting attention. It was raining now, and they could
safely count on a dark night.

The night came on black enough. The Company crossed the open
stretch without provoking fire, and slipped into the ravine to
wait for the hour of attack, A young doctor, a Pennsylvanian,
lately attached to the staff, had volunteered to come with them,
and he arranged a dressing station at the bottom of the ravine,
where the stretchers were left. They were to pick up their
wounded on the way back. Anything left in that area would be
exposed to the artillery fire later on.

At ten o'clock the men began to ascend the water-course, creeping
through pools and little waterfalls, making a continuous spludgy
sound, like pigs rubbing against the sty. Claude, with the head
of the column, was just pulling out of the gully on the hillside
above the village, when a flare went up, and a volley of fire
broke from the brush on the up-hill side of the water-course;
machine guns, opening on the exposed line crawling below. The Hun
had been warned that the Americans were crossing the plain and
had anticipated their way of approach. The men in the gully were
trapped; they could not retaliate with effect, and the bullets
from the Maxims bounded on the rocks about them like hail.
Gerhardt ran along the edge of the line, urging the men not to
fall back and double on themselves, but to break out of the gully
on the downhill side and scatter.

Claude, with his group, started back. "Go into the brush and get
'em! Our fellows have got no chance down there. Grenades while
they last, then bayonets. Pull your plugs and don't hold on too
long."

They were already on the run, charging the brush. The Hun gunners
knew the hill like a book, and when the bombs began bursting
among them, they took to trails and burrows. "Don't follow them
off into the rocks," Claude kept calling. "Straight ahead! Clear
everything to the ravine."

As the German gunners made for cover, the firing into the gully
stopped, and the arrested column poured up the steep defile after
Gerhardt.

Claude and his party found themselves back at the foot of the
hill, at the edge of the ravine from which they had started.
Heavy firing on the hill above told them the rest of the men had
got through. The quickest way back to the scene of action was by
the same water-course they had climbed before. They dropped into
it and started up. Claude, at the rear, felt the ground rise
under him, and he was swept with a mountain of earth and rock
down into the ravine.

He never knew whether he lost consciousness or not. It seemed to
him that he went on having continuous sensations. The first, was
that of being blown to pieces; of swelling to an enormous size
under intolerable pressure, and then bursting. Next he felt
himself shrink and tingle, like a frost-bitten body thawing out.
Then he swelled again, and burst. This was repeated, he didn't
know how often. He soon realized that he was lying under a great
weight of earth; his body, not his head. He felt rain falling on
his face. His left hand was free, and still attached to his arm.
He moved it cautiously to his face. He seemed to be bleeding from
the nose and ears. Now he began to wonder where he was hurt; he
felt as if he were full of shell splinters. Everything was buried
but his head and left shoulder. A voice was calling from
somewhere below.

"Are any of you fellows alive ?"

Claude closed his eyes against the rain beating in his face. The
same voice came again, with a note of patient despair.

"If there's anybody left alive in this hole, won't he speak up ?
I'm badly hurt myself."

That must be the new doctor; wasn't his dressing station
somewhere down here ? Hurt, he said. Claude tried to move his legs
a little. Perhaps, if he could get out from under the dirt, he
might hold together long enough to reach the doctor. He began to
wriggle and pull. The wet earth sucked at him; it was painful
business. He braced himself with his elbows, but kept slipping
back.

"I'm the only one left, then ?" said the mournful voice below.

At last Claude worked himself out of his burrow, but he was
unable to stand. Every time he tried to stand, he got faint and
seemed to burst again. Something was the matter with his right
ankle, too--he couldn't bear his weight on it. Perhaps he had
been too near the shell to be hit; he had heard the boys tell of
such cases. It had exploded under his feet and swept him down
into the ravine, but hadn't left any metal in his body. If it had
put anything into him, it would have put so much that he wouldn't
be sitting here speculating. He began to crawl down the slope on
all fours. "Is that the Doctor ? Where are you ?"

"Here, on a stretcher. They shelled us. Who are you ? Our fellows
got up, didn't they ?"

"I guess most of them did. What happened back here ?"

"I'm afraid it's my fault," the voice said sadly. "I used my
flash light, and that must have given them the range. They put
three or four shells right on top of us. The fellows that got
hurt in the gully kept stringing back here, and I couldn't do
anything in the dark. I had to have a light to do anything. I
just finished putting on a Johnson splint when the first shell
came. I guess they're all done for now."

"How many were there ?"

"Fourteen, I think. Some of them weren't much hurt. They'd all be
alive, if I hadn't come out with you."

"Who were they ? But you don't know our names yet, do you ? You didn't
see Lieutenant Gerhardt among them ?"

"Don't think so."

"Nor Sergeant Hicks, the fat fellow ?"

"Don't think so."

"Where are you hurt ?"

"Abdominal. I can't tell anything without a light. I lost my
flash light. It never occurred to me that it could make trouble;
it's one I use at home, when the babies are sick," the doctor
murmured.

Claude tried to strike a match, with no success. "Wait a minute,
where's your helmet ?" He took off his metal hat, held it over the
doctor, and managed to strike a light underneath it. The wounded
man had already loosened his trousers, and now he pulled up his
bloody shirt. His groin and abdomen were torn on the left side.
The wound, and the stretcher on which he lay, supported a mass of
dark, coagulated blood that looked like a great cow's liver.

"I guess I've got mine," the Doctor murmured as the match went
out.

Claude struck another. "Oh, that can't be! Our fellows will be
back pretty soon, and we can do something for you."

"No use, Lieutenant. Do you suppose you could strip a coat off
one of those poor fellows ? I feel the cold terribly in my
intestines. I had a bottle of French brandy, but I suppose it's
buried."

Claude stripped off his own coat, which was warm on the inside,
and began feeling about in the mud for the brandy. He wondered
why the poor man wasn't screaming with pain. The firing on the
hill had ceased, except for the occasional click of a Maxim, off
in the rocks somewhere. His watch said 12:10; could anything have
miscarried up there ?

Suddenly, voices above, a clatter of boots on the shale. He began
shouting to them.

"Coming, coming!" He knew the voice. Gerhardt and his rifles ran
down into the ravine with a bunch of prisoners. Claude called to
them to be careful. "Don't strike a light! They've been shelling
down here."

"All right are you, Wheeler ? Where are the wounded ?"

"There aren't any but the Doctor and me. Get us out of here
quick. I'm all right, but I can't walk."

They put Claude on a stretcher and sent him ahead. Four big
Germans carried him, and they were prodded to a lope by Hicks and
Dell Able. Four of their own men took up the doctor, and Gerhardt
walked beside him. In spite of their care, the motion started the
blood again and tore away the clots that had formed over his
wounds. He began to vomit blood and to strangle. The men put the
stretcher down. Gerhardt lifted the Doctor's head. "It's over,"
he said presently. "Better make the best time you can."

They picked up their load again. "Them that are carrying him now
won't jolt him," said Oscar, the pious Swede.

B Company lost nineteen men in the raid. Two days later the
Company went off on a ten-day leave. Claude's sprained ankle was
twice its natural size, but to avoid being sent to the hospital
he had to march to the railhead. Sergeant Hicks got him a giant
shoe he found stuck on the barbed wire entanglement. Claude and
Gerhardt were going off on their leave together.

XII

A rainy autumn night; Papa Joubert sat reading his paper. He
heard a heavy pounding on his garden gate. Kicking off his
slippers, he put on the wooden sabots he kept for mud, shuffled
across the dripping garden, and opened the door into the dark
street. Two tall figures with rifles and kits confronted him. In
a moment he began embracing them, calling to his wife:

"Nom de diable, Maman, c'est David, David et Claude, tous les
deux!"

Sorry-looking soldiers they appeared when they stood in the
candlelight, plastered with clay, their metal hats shining like
copper bowls, their clothes dripping pools of water upon the
flags of the kitchen floor. Mme. Joubert kissed their wet cheeks,
and Monsieur, now that he could see them, embraced them again.
Whence had they come, and how had it fared with them, up there ?
Very well, as anybody could see. What did they want
first,--supper, perhaps ? Their room was always ready for them; and
the clothes they had left were in the big chest.

David explained that their shirts had not once been dry for four
days; and what they most desired was to be dry and to be clean.
Old Martha, already in bed, was routed out to heat water. M.
Joubert carried the big washtub upstairs. Tomorrow for
conversation, he said; tonight for repose. The boys followed him
and began to peel off their wet uniforms, leaving them in two
sodden piles on the floor. There was one bath for both, and they
threw up a coin to decide which should get into the warm water
first. M. Joubert, seeing Claude's fat ankle strapped up in
adhesive bandages, began to chuckle. "Oh, I see the Boche made
you dance up there!"

When they were clad in clean pyjamas out of the chest, Papa
Joubert carried their shirts and socks down for Martha to wash.
He returned with the big meat platter, on which was an omelette
made of twelve eggs and stuffed with bacon and fried potatoes.
Mme. Joubert brought the three-story earthen coffee-pot to the
door and called, "Bon appetit!" The host poured the coffee and
cut up the loaf with his clasp knife. He sat down to watch them
eat. How had they found things up there, anyway ? The Boches
polite and agreeable as usual ? Finally, when there was not a
crumb of anything left, he poured for each a little glass of
brandy, "pour cider la digestion," and wished them good-night. He
took the candle with him.

Perfect bliss, Claude reflected, as the chill of the sheets grew
warm around his body, and he sniffed in the pillow the old smell
of lavender. To be so warm, so dry, so clean, so beloved! The
journey down, reviewed from here, seemed beautiful. As soon as
they had got out of the region of martyred trees, they found the
land of France turning gold. All along the river valleys the
poplars and cottonwoods had changed from green to yellow,--evenly
coloured, looking like candle flames in the mist and rain. Across
the fields, along the horizon they ran, like torches passed from
hand to hand, and all the willows by the little streams had
become silver. The vineyards were green still, thickly spotted
with curly, blood-red branches. It all flashed back beside his
pillow in the dark: this beautiful land, this beautiful people,
this beautiful omelette; gold poplars, blue-green vineyards, wet,
scarlet vine leaves, rain dripping into the court, fragrant
darkness... sleep, stronger than all.



XIII

The woodland path was deep in leaves. Claude and David were lying
on the dry, springy heather among the flint boulders. Gerhardt,
with his Stetson over his eyes, was presumably asleep. They were
having fine weather for their holiday. The forest rose about this
open glade like an amphitheatre, in golden terraces of
horse chestnut and beech. The big nuts dropped velvety and brown,
as if they had been soaked in oil, and disappeared in the dry
leaves below. Little black yew trees, that had not been visible
in the green of summer, stood out among the curly yellow brakes.
Through the grey netting of the beech twigs, stiff holly bushes
glittered.

It was the Wheeler way to dread false happiness, to feel cowardly
about being fooled. Since he had come back, Claude had more than
once wondered whether he took too much for granted and felt more
at home here than he had any right to feel. The Americans were
prone, he had observed, to make themselves very much at home, to
mistake good manners for good-will. He had no right to doubt the
affection of the Jouberts, however; that was genuine and
personal,--not a smooth surface under which almost any shade of
scorn might lie and laugh... was not, in short, the
treacherous "French politeness" by which one must not let oneself
be taken in. Merely having seen the season change in a country
gave one the sense of having been there for a long time. And,
anyway, he wasn't a tourist. He was here on legitimate business.

Claude's sprained ankle was still badly swollen. Madame Joubert
was sure he ought not to move about on it at all, begged him to
sit in the garden all day and nurse it. But the surgeon at the
front had told him that if he once stopped walking, he would have
to go to the hospital. So, with the help of his host's best
holly-wood cane, he limped out into the forest every day. This
afternoon he was tempted to go still farther. Madame Joubert had
told him about some caves at the other end of the wood,
underground chambers where the country people had gone to live in
times of great misery, long ago, in the English wars. The English
wars; he could not remember just how far back they were,--but
long enough to make one feel comfortable. As for him, perhaps he
would never go home at all. Perhaps, when this great affair was
over, he would buy a little farm and stay here for the rest of
his life. That was a project he liked to play with. There was no
chance for the kind of life he wanted at home, where people were
always buying and selling, building and pulling down. He had
begun to believe that the Americans were a people of shallow
emotions. That was the way Gerhardt had put it once; and if it
was true, there was no cure for it. Life was so short that it
meant nothing at all unless it were continually reinforced by
something that endured; unless the shadows of individual
existence came and went against a background that held together.
While he was absorbed in his day dream of farming in France, his
companion stirred and rolled over on his elbow.

"You know we are to join the Battalion at A--. They'll be living
like kings there. Hicks will get so fat he'll drop over on the
march. Headquarters must have something particularly nasty in
mind; the infantry is always fed up before a slaughter. But I've
been thinking; I have some old friends at A--. Suppose we go on
there a day early, and get them to take us in ? It's a fine old
place, and I ought to go to see them. The son was a fellow
student of mine at the Conservatoire. He was killed the second
winter of the war. I used to go up there for the holidays with
him; I would like to see his mother and sister again. You've no
objection ?"

Claude did not answer at once. He lay squinting off at the beech
trees, without moving. "You always avoid that subject with me,
don't you ?" he said presently.

"What subject ?"

"Oh, anything to do with the Conservatoire, or your profession."

"I haven't any profession at present. I'll never go back to the
violin."

"You mean you couldn't make up for the time you'll lose ?"

Gerhardt settled his back against a rock and got out his pipe.
"That would be difficult; but other things would be harder. I've
lost much more than time."

"Couldn't you have got exemption, one way or another ?"

"I might have. My friends wanted to take it up and make a test
case of me. But I couldn't stand for it. I didn't feel I was a
good enough violinist to admit that I wasn't a man. I often wish
I had been in Paris that summer when the war broke out; then I
would have gone into the French army on the first impulse, with
the other students, and it would have been better."

David paused and sat puffing at his pipe. Just then a soft
movement stirred the brakes on the hillside. A little barefoot
girl stood there, looking about. She had heard voices, but at
first did not see the uniforms that blended with the yellow and
brown of the wood. Then she saw the sun shining on two heads; one
square, and amber in colour,--the other reddish bronze, long and
narrow. She took their friendliness for granted and came down the
hill, stopping now and again to pick up shiny horse chestnuts and
pop them into a sack she was dragging. David called to her and
asked her whether the nuts were good to eat.

"Oh, non!" she exclaimed, her face expressing the liveliest
terror, "pour les cochons!" These inexperienced Americans might
eat almost anything. The boys laughed and gave her some pennies,
"pour les cochons aussi." She stole about the edge of the wood,
stirring among the leaves for nuts, and watching the two
soldiers.

Gerhardt knocked out his pipe and began to fill it again. "I went
home to see my mother in May, of 1914. I wasn't here when the war
broke out. The Conservatoire closed at once, so I arranged a
concert tour in the States that winter, and did very well. That
was before all the little Russians went over, and the field
wasn't so crowded. I had a second season, and that went well. But
I was getting more nervous all the time; I was only half there."
He smoked thoughtfully, sitting with folded arms, as if he were
going over a succession of events or states of feeling. "When my
number was drawn, I reported to see what I could do about getting
out; I took a look at the other fellows who were trying to
squirm, and chucked it. I've never been sorry. Not long
afterward, my violin was smashed, and my career seemed to go
along with it."

Claude asked him what he meant.

"While I was at Camp Dix, I had to play at one of the
entertainments. My violin, a Stradivarius, was in a vault in New
York. I didn't need it for that concert, any more than I need it
at this minute; yet I went to town and brought it out. I was
taking it up from the station in a military car, and a drunken
taxi driver ran into us. I wasn't hurt, but the violin, lying
across my knees, was smashed into a thousand pieces. I didn't
know what it meant then; but since, I've seen so many beautiful
old things smashed... I've become a fatalist."

Claude watched his brooding head against the grey flint rock.

"You ought to have kept out of the whole thing. Any army man
would say so."

David's head went back against the boulder, and he threw one of
the, chestnuts lightly into the air. "Oh, one violinist more or
less doesn't matter! But who is ever going back to anything ?
That's what I want to know!"

Claude felt guilty; as if David must have guessed what apostasy
had been going on in his own mind this afternoon. "You don't
believe we are going to get out of this war what we went in for,
do you ?" he asked suddenly.

"Absolutely not," the other replied with cool indifference.

"Then I certainly don't see what you're here for!"

"Because in 1917 I was twenty-four years old, and able to bear
arms. The war was put up to our generation. I don't know what
for; the sins of our fathers, probably. Certainly not to make the
world safe for Democracy, or any rhetoric of that sort. When I
was doing stretcher work, I had to tell myself over and over that
nothing would come of it, but that it had to be. Sometimes,
though, I think something must.... Nothing we expect, but
something unforeseen." He paused and shut his eyes. "You remember
in the old mythology tales how, when the sons of the gods were
born, the mothers always died in agony ? Maybe it's only Semele
I'm thinking of. At any rate, I've sometimes wondered whether the
young men of our time had to die to bring a new idea into the
world... something Olympian. I'd like to know. I think I shall
know. Since I've been over here this time, I've come to believe
in immortality. Do you ?"

Claude was confused by this quiet question. "I hardly know. I've
never been able to make up my mind."

"Oh, don't bother about it! If it comes to you, it comes. You
don't have to go after it. I arrived at it in quite the same way
I used to get things in art,--knowing them and living on them
before I understood them. Such ideas used to seem childish to
me." Gerhardt sprang up. "Now, have I told you what you want to
know about my case ?" He looked down at Claude with a curious
glimmer of amusement and affection. "I'm going to stretch my
legs. It's four o'clock."

He disappeared among the red pine stems, where the sunlight made
a rose-colored lake, as it used to do in the summer... as it
would do in all the years to come, when they were not there to
see it, Claude was thinking. He pulled his hat over his eyes and
went to sleep.

The little girl on the edge of the beech wood left her sack and
stole quietly down the hill. Sitting in the heather and drawing
her feet up under her, she stayed still for a long time, and
regarded with curiosity the relaxed, deep breathing body of the
American soldier.

The next day was Claude's twenty-fifth birthday, and in honour of
that event Papa Joubert produced a bottle of old Burgundy from
his cellar, one of a few dozens he had laid in for great
occasions when he was a young man.

During that week of idleness at Madame Joubert's, Claude often
thought that the period of happy "youth," about which his old
friend Mrs. Erlich used to talk, and which he had never
experienced, was being made up to him now. He was having his
youth in France. He knew that nothing like this would ever come
again; the fields and woods would never again be laced over with
this hazy enchantment. As he came up the village street in the
purple evening, the smell of wood-smoke from the chimneys went to
his head like a narcotic, opened the pores of his skin, and
sometimes made the tears come to his eyes. Life had after all
turned out well for him, and everything had a noble significance.
The nervous tension in which he had lived for years now seemed
incredible to him... absurd and childish, when he thought of
it at all. He did not torture himself with recollections. He was
beginning over again.

One night he dreamed that he was at home; out in the ploughed
fields, where he could see nothing but the furrowed brown earth,
stretching from horizon to horizon. Up and down it moved a boy,
with a plough and two horses. At first he thought it was his
brother Ralph; but on coming nearer, he saw it was himself,--and
he was full of fear for this boy. Poor Claude, he would never,
never get away; he was going to miss everything! While he was
struggling to speak to Claude, and warn him, he awoke.

In the years when he went to school in Lincoln, he was always
hunting for some one whom he could admire without reservations;
some one he could envy, emulate, wish to be. Now he believed that
even then he must have had some faint image of a man like
Gerhardt in his mind. It was only in war times that their paths
would have been likely to cross; or that they would have had
anything to do together... any of the common interests that
make men friends.

 XIV

Gerhardt and Claude Wheeler alighted from a taxi before the open
gates of a square-roofed, solid-looking house, where all the
shutters on the front were closed, and the tops of many trees
showed above the garden wall. They crossed a paved court and
rang at the door. An old valet admitted the young men, and took
them through a wide hall to the salon, which opened on the
garden. Madame and Mademoiselle would be down very soon. David
went to one of the long windows and looked out. "They have kept
it up, in spite of everything. It was always lovely here."

The garden was spacious,--like a little park. On one side was a
tennis court, on the other a fountain, with a pool and
water-lilies. The north wall was hidden by ancient yews; on the
south two rows of plane trees, cut square, made a long arbour. At
the back of the garden there were fine old lindens. The gravel
walks wound about beds of gorgeous autumn flowers; in the rose
garden, small white roses were still blooming, though the leaves
were already red.

Two ladies entered the drawing-room. The mother was short, plump,
and rosy, with strong, rather masculine features and yellowish
white hair. The tears flashed into her eyes as David bent to kiss
her hand, and she embraced him and touched both his cheeks with
her lips.

"Et vous, vous aussi!" she murmured, touching the coat of his
uniform with her fingers. There was but a moment of softness. She
gathered herself up like an old general, Claude thought, as he
stood watching the group from the window, drew her daughter
forward, and asked David whether he recognized the little girl
with whom he used to play. Mademoiselle Claire was not at all
like her mother; slender, dark, dressed in a white costume de
tennis and an apple green hat with black ribbons, she looked very
modern and casual and unconcerned. She was already telling David
she was glad he had arrived early, as now they would be able to
have a game of tennis before tea. Maman would bring her knitting
to the garden and watch them. This last suggestion relieved
Claude's apprehension that he might be left alone with his
hostess. When David called him and presented him to the ladies,
Mlle. Claire gave him a quick handshake, and said she would be
very glad to try him out on the court as soon as she had beaten
David. They would find tennis shoes in their room,--a collection
of shoes, for the feet of all nations; her brother's, some that
his Russian friend had forgotten when he hurried off to be
mobilized, and a pair lately left by an English officer who was
quartered on them. She and her mother would wait in the garden.
She rang for the old valet.

The Americans found themselves in a large room upstairs, where
two modern iron beds stood out conspicuous among heavy mahogany
bureaus and desks and dressing-tables, stuffed chairs and velvet
carpets and dull red brocade window hangings. David went at once
into the little dressing-room and began to array himself for the
tennis court. Two suits of flannels and a row of soft shirts hung
there on the wall.

"Aren't you going to change ?" he asked, noticing that Claude
stood stiff and unbending by the window, looking down into the
garden. "Why should I ?" said Claude scornfully. "I don't play
tennis. I never had a racket in my hand."

"Too bad. She used to play very well, though she was only a
youngster then." Gerhardt was regarding his legs in trousers two
inches too short for him. "How everything has changed, and yet
how everything is still the same! It's like coming back to places
in dreams."

"They don't give you much time to dream, I should say!" Claude
remarked.

"Fortunately!"

"Explain to the girl that I don't play, will you ? I'll be down
later."

"As you like."

Claude stood in the window, watching Gerhardt's bare head and
Mlle. Claire's green hat and long brown arm go bounding about
over the court.

When Gerhardt came to change before tea, he found his fellow
officer standing before his bag, which was open, but not
unpacked.

"What's the matter ? Feeling shellshock again ?"

"Not exactly." Claude bit his lip. "The fact is, Dave, I don't
feel just comfortable here. Oh, the people are all right. But
I'm out of place. I'm going to pull out and get a billet
somewhere else, and let you visit your friends in peace. Why
should I be here ? These people don't keep a hotel."

"They very nearly do, from what they've been telling me. They've
had a string of Scotch and English quartered on them. They like
it, too,-or have the good manners to pretend they do. Of course,
you'll do as you like, but you'll hurt their feelings and put me
in an awkward position. To be frank, I don't see how you can go
away without being distinctly rude."

Claude stood looking down at the contents of his bag in an
irresolute attitude. Catching a glimpse of his face in one of the
big mirrors, Gerhardt saw that he looked perplexed and miserable.
His flash of temper died, and he put his hand lightly on his
friend's shoulder.

"Come on, Claude! This is too absurd. You don't even have to
dress, thanks to your uniform,--and you don't have to talk, since
you're not supposed to know the language. I thought you'd like
coming here. These people have had an awfully rough time; can't
you admire their pluck ?"

"Oh, yes, I do! It's awkward for me, though." Claude pulled off
his coat and began to brush his hair vigorously. "I guess I've
always been more afraid of the French than of the Germans. It
takes courage to stay, you understand. I want to run."

"But why ? What makes you want to ?"

"Oh, I don't know! Something in the house, in the atmosphere."

"Something disagreeable ?"

"No. Something agreeable."

David laughed. "Oh, you'll get over that!"

They had tea in the garden, English fashion--English tea, too,
Mlle. Claire informed them, left by the English officers.

At dinner a third member of the family was introduced, a little
boy with a cropped head and big black eyes. He sat on Claude's
left, quiet and shy in his velvet jacket, though he followed the
conversation eagerly, especially when it touched upon his brother
Rene, killed at Verdun in the second winter of the war. The
mother and sister talked about him as if he were living, about
his letters and his plans, and his friends at the Conservatoire
and in the Army. Mlle. Claire told Gerhardt news of all the girl
students he had known in Paris: how this one was singing for the
soldiers; another, when she was nursing in a hospital which was
bombed in an air raid, had carried twenty wounded men out of the
burning building, one after another, on her back, like sacks of
flour. Alice, the dancer, had gone into the English Red Cross and
learned English. Odette had married a New Zealander, an officer
who was said to be a cannibal; it was well known that his tribe
had eaten two Auvergnat missionaries. There was a great deal more
that Claude could not understand, but he got enough to see that
for these women the war was France, the war was life, and
everything that went into it. To be alive, to be conscious and
have one's faculties, was to be in the war.

After dinner, when they went into the salon, Madame Fleury asked
David whether he would like to see Rene's violin again, and
nodded to the little boy. He slipped away and returned carrying
the case, which he placed on the table. He opened it carefully
and took off the velvet cloth, as if this was his peculiar
office, then handed the instrument to Gerhardt.

David turned it over under the candles, telling Madame Fleury
that he would have known it anywhere, Rene's wonderful Amati,
almost too exquisite in tone for the concert hall, like a woman
who is too beautiful for the stage. The family stood round and
listened to his praise with evident satisfaction. Madame Fleury
told him that Lucien was très sérieux with his music, that his
master was well pleased with him, and when his hand was a little
larger he would be allowed to play upon Rene's violin. Claude
watched the little boy as he stood looking at the instrument in
David's hands; in each of his big black eyes a candle flame was
reflected, as if some steady fire were actually burning there.

"What is it, Lucien ?" his mother asked.

"If Monsieur David would be so good as to play before I must go
to bed--" he murmured entreatingly.

"But, Lucien, I am a soldier now. I have not worked at all for
two years. The Amati would think it had fallen into the hands of
a Boche."

Lucien smiled. "Oh, no! It is too intelligent for that. A little,
please," and he sat down on a footstool before the sofa in
confident anticipation.

Mlle. Claire went to the piano. David frowned and began to tune
the violin. Madame Fleury called the old servant and told him to
light the sticks that lay in the fireplace. She took the
arm-chair at the right of the hearth and motioned Claude to a
seat on the left. The little boy kept his stool at the other end
of the room. Mlle. Claire began the orchestral introduction to
the Saint-Saens concerto.

"Oh, not that!" David lifted his chin and looked at her in
perplexity.

She made no reply, but played on, her shoulders bent forward.
Lucien drew his knees up under his chin and shivered. When the
time came, the violin made its entrance. David had put it back
under his chin mechanically, and the instrument broke into that
suppressed, bitter melody.

They played for a long while. At last David stopped and wiped his
forehead. "I'm afraid I can't do anything with the third
movement, really."

"Nor can I. But that was the last thing Rene played on it, the
night before he went away, after his last leave." She began
again, and David followed. Madame Fleury sat with half-closed
eyes, looking into the fire. Claude, his lips compressed, his
hands on his knees, was watching his friend's back. The music was
a part of his own confused emotions. He was torn between generous
admiration, and bitter, bitter envy. What would it mean to be
able to do anything as well as that, to have a hand capable of
delicacy and precision and power ? If he had been taught to do
anything at all, he would not be sitting here tonight a wooden
thing amongst living people. He felt that a man might have been
made of him, but nobody had taken the trouble to do it;
tongue-tied, foot-tied, hand-tied. If one were born into this
world like a bear cub or a bull calf, one could only paw and
upset things, break and destroy, all one's life.

Gerhardt wrapped the violin up in its cloth. The little boy
thanked him and carried it away. Madame Fleury and her daughter
wished their guests goodnight.

David said he was warm, and suggested going into the garden to
smoke before they went to bed. He opened one of the long windows
and they stepped out on the terrace. Dry leaves were rustling
down on the walks; the yew trees made a solid wall, blacker than
the darkness. The fountain must have caught the starlight; it was
the only shining thing,--a little clear column of twinkling
silver. The boys strolled in silence to the end of the walk.

"I guess you'll go back to your profession, all right," Claude
remarked, in the unnatural tone in which people sometimes speak
of things they know nothing about.

"Not I. Of course, I had to play for them. Music has always been
like a religion in this house. Listen," he put up his hand; far
away the regular pulsation of the big guns sounded through the
still night. "That's all that matters now. It has killed
everything else."

"I don't believe it." Claude stopped for a moment by the edge of
the fountain, trying to collect his thoughts. "I don't believe it
has killed anything. It has only scattered things." He glanced
about hurriedly at the sleeping house, the sleeping garden, the
clear, starry sky not very far overhead. "It's men like you that
get the worst of it," he broke out. "But as for me, I never knew
there was anything worth living for, till this war came on.
Before that, the world seemed like a business proposition."

"You'll admit it's a costly way of providing adventure for the
young," said David drily.

"Maybe so; all the same..."

Claude pursued the argument to himself long after they were in
their luxurious beds and David was asleep. No battlefield or
shattered country he had seen was as ugly as this world would be
if men like his brother Bayliss controlled it altogether. Until
the war broke out, he had supposed they did control it; his
boyhood had been clouded and enervated by that belief. The
Prussians had believed it, too, apparently. But the event had
shown that there were a great many people left who cared about
something else.

The intervals of the distant artillery fire grew shorter, as if
the big guns were tuning up, choking to get something out. Claude
sat up in his bed and listened. The sound of the guns had from
the first been pleasant to him, had given him a feeling of
confidence and safety; tonight he knew why. What they said was,
that men could still die for an idea; and would burn all they had
made to keep their dreams. He knew the future of the world was
safe; the careful planners would never be able to put it into a
strait-jacket,--cunning and prudence would never have it to
themselves. Why, that little boy downstairs, with the candlelight
in his eyes, when it came to the last cry, as they said, could
"carry on" for ever! Ideals were not archaic things, beautiful
and impotent; they were the real sources of power among men. As
long as that was true, and now he knew it was true--he had come
all this way to find out--he had no quarrel with Destiny. Nor did
he envy David. He would give his own adventure for no man's. On
the edge of sleep it seemed to glimmer, like the clear column of
the fountain, like the new moon,--alluring, half-averted, the
bright face of danger.



XV

When Claude and David rejoined their Battalion on the 20th of
September, the end of the war looked as far away as ever. The
collapse of Bulgaria was unknown to the American army, and their
acquaintance with European affairs was so slight that this would
have meant very little to them had they heard of it. The German
army still held the north and east of France, and no one could
say how much vitality was left in that sprawling body.

The Battalion entrained at Arras. Lieutenant Colonel Scott had
orders to proceed to the railhead, and then advance on foot into
the Argonne.

The cars were crowded, and the railway journey was long and
fatiguing. They detrained at night, in the rain, at what the men
said seemed to be the jumping off place. There was no town, and
the railway station had been bombed the day before, by an air
fleet out to explode artillery ammunition. A mound of brick, and
holes full of water told where it had been. The Colonel sent
Claude out with a patrol to find some place for the men to sleep.
The patrol came upon a field of straw stacks, and at the end of it
found a black farmhouse.

Claude went up and hammered on the door. Silence. He kept
hammering and calling, "The Americans are here!" A shutter
opened. The farmer stuck his head out and demanded gruffly what
was wanted; "What now ?"

Claude explained in his best French that an American battalion
had just come in; might they sleep in his field if they did not
destroy his stacks ?

"Sure," replied the farmer, and shut the window.

That one word, coming out of the dark in such an unpromising
place, had a cheering effect upon the patrol, and upon the men,
when it was repeated to them. "Sure, eh ?" They kept laughing over
it as they beat about the field and dug into the straw. Those who
couldn't burrow into a stack lay down in the muddy stubble. They
were asleep before they could feel sorry for themselves.

The farmer came out to offer his stable to the officers, and to
beg them not on any account to make a light. They had never been
bothered here by air raids until yesterday, and it must be
because the Americans were coming and were sending in ammunition.

Gerhardt, who was called to talk to him, told the farmer the
Colonel must study his map, and for that the man took them down
into the cellar, where the children were asleep. Before he lay
down on the straw bed his orderly had made for him, the Colonel
kept telling names and kilometers off on his fingers. For
officers like Colonel Scott the names of places constituted one
of the real hardships of the war. His mind worked slowly, but it
was always on his job, and he could go without sleep for more
hours together than any of his officers. Tonight he had scarcely
lain down, when a sentinel brought in a runner with a message.
The Colonel had to go into the cellar again to read it. He was to
meet Colonel Harvey at Prince Joachim farm, as early as possible
tomorrow morning. The runner would act as guide.

The Colonel sat with his eye on his watch, and interrogated the
messenger about the road and the time it would take to get over
the ground. "What's Fritz's temper up here, generally speaking ?"

"That's as it happens, sir. Sometimes we nab a night patrol of a
dozen or fifteen and send them to the rear under a one-man guard.
Then, again, a little bunch of Heinies will fight like the devil.
They say it depends on what part of Germany they come from; the
Bavarians and Saxons are the bravest."

Colonel Scott waited for an hour, and then went about, shaking
his sleeping officers.

"Yes, sir." Captain Maxey sprang to his feet as if he had been
caught in a disgraceful act. He called his sergeants, and they
began to beat the men up out of the strawstacks and puddles. In
half an hour they were on the road.

This was the Battalion's first march over really bad roads, where
walking was a question of pulling and balancing. They were soon
warm, at any rate; it kept them sweating. The weight of their
equipment was continually thrown in the wrong place. Their wet
clothing dragged them back, their packs got twisted and cut into
their shoulders. Claude and Hicks began wondering to each other
what it must have been like in the real mud, up about Ypres and
Passchendaele, two years ago. Hicks had been training at Arras
last week, where a lot of Tommies were "resting" in the same way,
and he had tales to tell.

The Battalion got to Joachim farm at nine o'clock. Colonel Harvey
had not yet come up, but old Julius Caesar was there with his
engineers, and he had a hot breakfast ready for them. At six
o'clock in the evening they took the road again, marching until
daybreak, with short rests. During the night they captured two
Hun patrols, a bunch of thirty men. At the halt for breakfast,
the prisoners wanted to make themselves useful, but the cook said
they were so filthy the smell of them would make a stew go bad.
They were herded off by themselves, a good distance from the grub
line.

It was Gerhardt, of course, who had to go over and question them.
Claude felt sorry for the prisoners; they were so willing to tell
all they knew, and so anxious to make themselves agreeable; began
talking about their relatives in America, and said brightly that
they themselves were going over at once, after the war--seemed to
have no doubt that everybody would be glad to see them!

They begged Gerhardt to be allowed to do something. Couldn't they
carry the officers' equipment on the march ? No, they were too
buggy; they might relieve the sanitary squad. Oh, that they would
gladly do, Herr Offizier!

The plan was to get to Rupprecht trench and take it before
nightfall. It was easy taking--empty of everything but vermin and
human discards; a dozen crippled and sick, left for the enemy to
dispose of, and several half-witted youths who ought to have been
locked up in some institution. Fritz had known what it meant when
his patrols did not come back. He had evacuated, leaving behind
his hopelessly diseased, and as much filth as possible. The
dugouts were fairly dry, but so crawling with vermin that the
Americans preferred to sleep in the mud, in the open.

After supper the men fell on their packs and began to lighten
them, throwing away all that was not necessary, and much that
was. Many of them abandoned the new overcoats that had been
served out at the railhead; others cut off the skirts and made
the coats into ragged jackets. Captain Maxey was horrified at
these depredations, but the Colonel advised him to shut his eyes.
"They've got hard going before them; let them travel light. If
they'd rather stand the cold, they've got a right to choose."



XVI

The Battalion had twenty-four hours' rest at Rupprecht trench,
and then pushed on for four days and nights, stealing trenches,
capturing patrols, with only a few hours' sleep,--snatched by the
roadside while their food was being prepared. They pushed hard
after a retiring foe, and almost outran themselves. They did
outrun their provisions; on the fourth night, when they fell
upon a farm that had been a German Headquarters, the supplies
that were to meet them there had not come up, and they went to
bed supperless.

This farmhouse, for some reason called by the prisoners Frau
Hulda farm, was a nest of telephone wires; hundreds of them ran
out through the walls, in all directions. The Colonel cut those
he could find, and then put a guard over the old peasant who had
been left in charge of the house, suspecting that he was in the
pay of the enemy.

At last Colonel Scott got into the Headquarters bed, large and
lumpy,--the first one he had seen since he left Arras. He had not
been asleep more than two hours, when a runner arrived with
orders from the Regimental Colonel. Claude was in a bed in the
loft, between Gerhardt and Bruger. He felt somebody shaking him,
but resolved that he wouldn't be disturbed and went on placidly
sleeping. Then somebody pulled his hair,--so hard that he sat up.
Captain Maxey was standing over the bed.

"Come along, boys. Orders from Regimental Headquarters. The
Battalion is to split here. Our Company is to go on four
kilometers tonight, and take the town of Beaufort."

Claude rose. "The men are pretty well beat out, Captain Maxey,
and they had no supper."

"That can't be helped. Tell them we are to be in Beaufort for
breakfast."

Claude and Gerhardt went out to the barn and roused Hicks and his
pal, Dell Able. The men were asleep in dry straw, for the first
time in ten days. They were completely worn out, lost to time and
place. Many of them were already four thousand miles away,
scattered among little towns and farms on the prairie. They were
a miserable looking lot as they got together, stumbling about in
the dark.

After the Colonel had gone over the map with Captain Maxey, he
came out and saw the Company assembled. He wasn't going with
them, he told them, but he expected them to give a good account
of themselves. Once in Beaufort, they would have a week's rest;
sleep under cover, and live among people for awhile.

The men took the road, some with their eyes shut, trying to make
believe they were still asleep, trying to have their agreeable
dreams over again, as they marched. They did not really waken up
until the advance challenged a Hun patrol, and sent it back to
the Colonel under a one-man guard. When they had advanced two
kilometers, they found the bridge blown up. Claude and Hicks went
in one direction to look for a ford, Bruger and Dell Able in the
other, and the men lay down by the roadside and slept heavily.
Just at dawn they reached the outskirts of the village, silent
and still.

Captain Maxey had no information as to how many Germans might be
left in the town. They had occupied it ever since the beginning
of the war, and had used it as a rest camp. There had never been
any fighting there.

At the first house on the road, the Captain stopped and pounded.
No answer.

"We are Americans, and must see the people of the house. If you
don't open, we must break the door."

A woman's voice called; "There is nobody here. Go away, please,
and take your men away. I am sick."

The Captain called Gerhardt, who began to explain and reassure
through the door. It opened a little way, and an old woman in a
nightcap peeped out. An old man hovered behind her. She gazed in
astonishment at the officers, not understanding. These were the
first soldiers of the Allies she had ever seen. She had heard the
Germans talk about Americans, but thought it was one of their
lies, she said. Once convinced, she let the officers come in and
replied to their questions.

No, there were no Boches left in her house. They had got orders
to leave day before yesterday, and had blown up the bridge. They
were concentrating somewhere to the east. She didn't know how
many were still in the village, nor where they were, but she
could tell the Captain where they had been. Triumphantly she
brought out a map of the town--lost, she said with a meaning
smile, by a German officer--on which the billets were marked.

With this to guide them, Captain Maxey and his men went on up the
street. They took eight prisoners in one cellar, seventeen in
another. When the villagers saw the prisoners bunched together in
the square, they came out of their houses and gave information.
This cleaning up, Bert Fuller remarked, was like taking fish
from the Platte River when the water was low, simply pailing them
out! There was no sport in it.

At nine o'clock the officers were standing together in the square
before the church, checking off on the map the houses that had
been searched. The men were drinking coffee, and eating fresh
bread from a baker's shop. The square was full of people who had
come out to see for themselves. Some believed that deliverance
had come, and others shook their heads and held back, suspecting
another trick. A crowd of children were running about, making
friends with the soldiers. One little girl with yellow curls and
a clean white dress had attached herself to Hicks, and was eating
chocolate out of his pocket. Gerhardt was bargaining with the
baker for another baking of bread. The sun was shining, for a
change,--everything was looking cheerful. This village seemed to
be swarming with girls; some of them were pretty, and all were
friendly. The men who had looked so haggard and forlorn when dawn
overtook them at the edge of the town, began squaring their
shoulders and throwing out their chests. They were dirty and
mud-plastered, but as Claude remarked to the Captain, they
actually looked like fresh men.

Suddenly a shot rang out above the chatter, and an old woman in a
white cap screamed and tumbled over on the pavement,--rolled
about, kicking indecorously with both hands and feet. A second
crack,--the little girl who stood beside Hicks, eating chocolate,
threw out her hands, ran a few steps, and fell, blood and brains
oozing out in her yellow hair. The people began screaming and
running. The Americans looked this way and that; ready to dash,
but not knowing where to go. Another shot, and Captain Maxey fell
on one knee, blushed furiously and sprang up, only to fall
again,--ashy white, with the leg of his trousers going red.

"There it is, to the left!" Hicks shouted, pointing. They saw
now. From a closed house, some distance down a street off the
square, smoke was coming. It hung before one of the upstairs
windows. The Captain's orderly dragged him into a wineshop.
Claude and David, followed by the men, ran down the street and
broke in the door. The two officers went through the rooms on the
first floor, while Hicks and his lot made straight for an
enclosed stairway at the back of the house. As they reached the
foot of the stairs, they were met by a volley of rifle shots, and
two of the men tumbled over. Four Germans were stationed at the
head of the steps.

The Americans scarcely knew whether their bullets or their
bayonets got to the Huns first; they were not conscious of going
up, till they were there. When Claude and David reached the
landing, the squad were wiping their bayonets, and four grey
bodies were piled in the corner.

Bert Fuller and Dell Able ran down the narrow hallway and threw
open the door into the room on the street. Two shots, and Dell
came back with his jaw shattered and the blood spouting from the
left side of his neck. Gerhardt caught him, and tried to close
the artery with his fingers.

"How many are in there, Bert ?" Claude called.

"I couldn't see. Look out, sir! You can't get through that door
more than two at a time!"

The door still stood open, at the end of the corridor. Claude
went down the steps until he could sight along the floor of the
passage, into the front room. The shutters were closed in there,
and the sunlight came through the slats. In the middle of the
floor, between the door and the windows, stood a tall chest of
drawers, with a mirror attached to the top. In the narrow space
between the bottom of this piece of furniture and the floor, he
could see a pair of boots. It was possible there was but one man
in the room, shooting from behind his movable fort,--though there
might be others hidden in the corners.

"There's only one fellow in there, I guess. He's shooting from
behind a big dresser in the middle of the room. Come on, one of
you, we'll have to go in and get him."

Willy Katz, the Austrian boy from the Omaha packing house,
stepped up and stood beside him.

"Now, Willy, we'll both go in at once; you jump to the right, and
I to the left,--and one of us will jab him. He can't shoot both
ways at once. Are you ready ? All right--Now!"

Claude thought he was taking the more dangerous position himself,
but the German probably reasoned that the important man would be
on the right. As the two Americans dashed through the door, he
fired. Claude caught him in the back with his bayonet, under the
shoulder blade, but Willy Katz had got the bullet in his brain,
through one of his blue eyes. He fell, and never stirred. The
German officer fired his revolver again as he went down, shouting
in English, English with no foreign accent,

"You swine, go back to Chicago!" Then he began choking with
blood.

Sergeant Hicks ran in and shot the dying man through the temples.
Nobody stopped him.

The officer was a tall man, covered with medals and orders; must
have been very handsome. His linen and his hands were as white as
if he were going to a ball. On the dresser were the files and
paste and buffers with which he had kept his nails so pink and
smooth. A ring with a ruby, beautifully cut, was on his little
finger. Bert Fuller screwed it off and offered it to Claude. He
shook his head. That English sentence had unnerved him. Bert held
the ring out to Hicks, but the Sergeant threw down his revolver
and broke out:

"Think I'd touch anything of his ? That beautiful little girl, and
my buddy--He's worse than dead, Dell is, worse!" He turned his
back on his comrades so that they wouldn't see him cry.

"Can I keep it myself, sir ?" Bert asked.

Claude nodded. David had come in, and was opening the shutters.
This officer, Claude was thinking, was a very different sort of
being from the poor prisoners they had been scooping up like
tadpoles from the cellars. One of the men picked up a gorgeous
silk dressing gown from the bed, another pointed to a
dressing-case full of hammered silver. Gerhardt said it was
Russian silver; this man must have come from the Eastern front.
Bert Fuller and Nifty Jones were going through the officer's
pockets. Claude watched them, and thought they did about right.
They didn't touch his medals; but his gold cigarette case, and
the platinum watch still ticking on his wrist,--he wouldn't have
further need for them. Around his neck, hung by a delicate chain,
was a miniature case, and in it was a painting,--not, as Bert
romantically hoped when he opened it, of a beautiful woman, but
of a young man, pale as snow, with blurred forget-me-not eyes.

Claude studied it, wondering. "It looks like a poet, or
something. Probably a kid brother, killed at the beginning of the
war."

Gerhardt took it and glanced at it with a disdainful expression.
"Probably. There, let him keep it, Bert." He touched Claude on
the shoulder to call his attention to the inlay work on the
handle of the officer's revolver.

Claude noticed that David looked at him as if he were very much
pleased with him,--looked, indeed, as if something pleasant had
happened in this room; where, God knew, nothing had; where, when
they turned round, a swarm of black flies was quivering with
greed and delight over the smears Willy Katz' body had left on
the floor. Claude had often observed that when David had an
interesting idea, or a strong twinge of recollection, it made
him, for the moment, rather heartless. Just now he felt that
Gerhardt's flash of high spirits was in some way connected with
him. Was it because he had gone in with Willy ? Had David doubted
his nerve ?



XVII

When the survivors of Company B are old men, and are telling over
their good days, they will say to each other, "Oh, that week we
spent at Beaufort!" They will close their eyes and see a little
village on a low ridge, lost in the forest, overgrown with oak
and chestnut and black walnut... buried in autumn colour, the
streets drifted deep in autumn leaves, great branches interlacing
over the roofs of the houses, wells of cool water that tastes of
moss and tree roots. Up and down those streets they will see
figures passing; themselves, young and brown and clean-limbed;
and comrades, long dead, but still alive in that far-away
village. How they will wish they could tramp again, nights on
days in the mud and rain, to drag sore feet into their old
billets at Beaufort! To sink into those wide feather beds and
sleep the round of the clock while the old women washed and dried
their clothes for them; to eat rabbit stew and pommes frites in
the garden,--rabbit stew made with red wine and chestnuts. Oh,
the days that are no more!

As soon as Captain Maxey and the wounded men had been started on
their long journey to the rear, carried by the prisoners, the
whole company turned in and slept for twelve hours--all but
Sergeant Hicks, who sat in the house off the square, beside the
body of his chum.

The next day the Americans came to life as if they were new men,
just created in a new world. And the people of the town came to
life... excitement, change, something to look forward to at
last! A new flag, le drapeau étoilé, floated along with the
tricolour in the square. At sunset the soldiers stood in
formation behind it and sang "The Star Spangled Banner" with
uncovered heads. The old people watched them from the doorways.
The Americans were the first to bring "Madelon" to Beaufort. The
fact that the village had never heard this song, that the
children stood round begging for it, "Chantez-vous la Madelon!"
made the soldiers realize how far and how long out of the world
these villagers had been. The German occupation was like a
deafness which nothing pierced but their own arrogant martial
airs.

Before Claude was out of bed after his first long sleep, a runner
arrived from Colonel Scott, notifying him that he was in charge
of the Company until further orders. The German prisoners had
buried their own dead and dug graves for the Americans before
they were sent off to the rear. Claude and David were billeted at
the edge of the town, with the woman who had given Captain Maxey
his first information, when they marched in yesterday morning.
Their hostess told them, at their mid-day breakfast, that the old
dame who was shot in the square, and the little girl, were to be
buried this afternoon. Claude decided that the Americans might as
well have their funeral at the same time. He thought he would ask
the priest to say a prayer at the graves, and he and David set
off through the brilliant, rustling autumn sunshine to find the
Cure's house. It was next the church, with a high-walled garden
behind it. Over the bell-pull in the outer wall was a card on
which was written, "Tirez fort."

The priest himself came out to them, an old man who seemed weak
like his doorbell. He stood in his black cap, holding his hands
against his breast to keep them from shaking, and looked very old
indeed,--broken, hopeless, as if he were sick of this world and
done with it. Nowhere in France had Claude seen a face so sad as
his. Yes, he would say a prayer. It was better to have Christian
burial, and they were far from home, poor fellows! David asked
him whether the German rule had been very oppressive, but the old
man did not answer clearly, and his hands began to shake so
uncontrollably over his cassock that they went away to spare him
embarrassment.

"He seems a little gone in the head, don't you think ?" Claude
remarked.

"I suppose the war has used him up. How can he celebrate mass
when his hands quiver so ?" As they crossed the church steps,
David touched Claude's arm and pointed into the square. "Look,
every doughboy has a girl already! Some of them have trotted out
fatigue caps! I supposed they'd thrown them all away!"

Those who had no caps stood with their helmets under their arms,
in attitudes of exaggerated gallantry, talking to the women,--who
seemed all to have errands abroad. Some of them let the boys
carry their baskets. One soldier was giving a delighted little
girl a ride on his back.

After the funeral every man in the Company found some sympathetic
woman to talk to about his fallen comrades. All the garden
flowers and bead wreaths in Beaufort had been carried out and put
on the American graves. When the squad fired over them and the
bugle sounded, the girls and their mothers wept. Poor Willy Katz,
for instance, could never have had such a funeral in South Omaha.

The next night the soldiers began teaching the girls to dance the
"Pas Seul" and the "Fausse Trot." They had found an old violin in
the town; and Oscar, the Swede, scraped away on it. They danced
every evening. Claude saw that a good deal was going on, and he
lectured his men at parade. But he realized that he might as well
scold at the sparrows. Here was a village with several hundred
women, and only the grandmothers had husbands. All the men were
in the army; hadn't even been home on leave since the Germans
first took the place. The girls had been shut up for four years
with young men who incessantly coveted them, and whom they must
constantly outwit. The situation had been intolerable--and
prolonged. The Americans found themselves in the position of Adam
in the garden.

"Did you know, sir," said Bert Fuller breathlessly as he overtook
Claude in the street after parade, "that these lovely girls had
to go out in the fields and work, raising things for those dirty
pigs to eat ? Yes, sir, had to work in the fields, under German
sentinels; marched out in the morning and back at night like
convicts! It's sure up to us to give them a good time now."

One couldn't walk out of an evening without meeting loitering
couples in the dusky streets and lanes. The boys had lost all
their bashfulness about trying to speak French. They declared
they could get along in France with three verbs, and all,
happily, in the first conjugation: manger, aimer, payer,--quite
enough! They called Beaufort "our town," and they were called
"our Americans." They were going to come back after the war, and
marry the girls, and put in waterworks!

"Chez-moi, sir!" Bill Gates called to Claude, saluting with a
bloody hand, as he stood skinning rabbits before the door of his
billet. "Bunny casualties are heavy in town this week!"

"You know, Wheeler," David remarked one morning as they were
shaving, "I think Maxey would come back here on one leg if he
knew about these excursions into the forest after mushrooms."

"Maybe."

"Aren't you going to put a stop to them ?"

"Not I!" Claude jerked, setting the corners of his mouth grimly.
"If the girls, or their people, make complaint to me, I'll
interfere. Not otherwise. I've thought the matter over."

"Oh, the girls--" David laughed softly. "Well, it's something to
acquire a taste for mushrooms. They don't get them at home, do
they ?"

When, after eight days, the Americans had orders to march, there
was mourning in every house. On their last night in town, the
officers received pressing invitations to the dance in the
square. Claude went for a few moments, and looked on. David was
dancing every dance, but Hicks was nowhere to be seen. The poor
fellow had been out of everything. Claude went over to the church
to see whether he might be moping in the graveyard.

There, as he walked about, Claude stopped to look at a grave that
stood off by itself, under a privet hedge, with withered leaves
and a little French flag on it. The old woman with whom they
stayed had told them the story of this grave.

The Cure's niece was buried there. She was the prettiest girl in
Beaufort, it seemed, and she had a love affair with a German
officer and disgraced the town. He was a young Bavarian,
quartered with this same old woman who told them the story, and
she said he was a nice boy, handsome and gentle, and used to sit
up half the night in the garden with his head in his
hands--homesick, lovesick. He was always after this Marie Louise;
never pressed her, but was always there, grew up out of the
ground under her feet, the old woman said. The girl hated
Germans, like all the rest, and flouted him. He was sent to the
front. Then he came back, sick and almost deaf, after one of the
slaughters at Verdun, and stayed a long while. That spring a
story got about that some woman met him at night in the German
graveyard. The Germans had taken the land behind the church for
their cemetery, and it joined the wall of the Cure's garden. When
the women went out into the fields to plant the crops, Marie
Louise used to slip away from the others and meet her Bavarian in
the forest. The girls were sure of it now; and they treated her
with disdain. But nobody was brave enough to say anything to the
Cure. One day, when she was with her Bavarian in the wood, she
snatched up his revolver from the ground and shot herself. She
was a Frenchwoman at heart, their hostess said.

"And the Bavarian ?" Claude asked David later. The story had
become so complicated he could not follow it.

"He justified her, and promptly. He took the same pistol and shot
himself through the temples. His orderly, stationed at the edge
of the thicket to keep watch, heard the first shot and ran toward
them. He saw the officer take up the smoking pistol and turn it
on himself. But the Kommandant couldn't believe that one of his
officers had so much feeling. He held an enquête, dragged the
girl's mother and uncle into court, and tried to establish that
they were in conspiracy with her to seduce and murder a German
officer. The orderly was made to tell the whole story; how and
where they began to meet. Though he wasn't very delicate about
the details he divulged, he stuck to his statement that he saw
Lieutenant Muller shoot himself with his own hand, and the
Kommandant failed to prove his case. The old Cure had known
nothing of all this until he heard it aired in the military
court. Marie Louise had lived in his house since she was a child,
and was like his daughter. He had a stroke or something, and has
been like this ever since. The girl's friends forgave her, and
when she was buried off alone by the hedge, they began to take
flowers to her grave. The Kommandant put up an affiche on the
hedge, forbidding any one to decorate the grave. Apparently,
nothing during the German occupation stirred up more feeling than
poor Marie Louise."

It would stir anybody, Claude reflected. There was her lonely
little grave, the shadow of the privet hedge falling across it.
There, at the foot of the Cure's garden, was the German cemetery,
with heavy cement crosses,--some of them with long inscriptions;
lines from their poets, and couplets from old hymns. Lieutenant
Muller was there somewhere, probably. Strange, how their story
stood out in a world of suffering. That was a kind of misery he
hadn't happened to think of before; but the same thing must have
occurred again and again in the occupied territory. He would
never forget the Cure's hands, his dim, suffering eyes.

Claude recognized David crossing the pavement in front of the
church, and went back to meet him.

"Hello! I mistook you for Hicks at first. I thought he might be
out here." David sat down on the steps and lit a cigarette.

"So did I. I came out to look for him."

"Oh, I expect he's found some shoulder to cry on. Do you realize,
Claude, you and I are the only men in the Company who haven't got
engaged ? Some of the married men have got engaged twice. It's a
good thing we're pulling out, or we'd have banns and a bunch of
christenings to look after." "All the same," murmured Claude, "I
like the women of this country, as far as I've seen them." While
they sat smoking in silence, his mind went back to the quiet
scene he had watched on the steps of that other church, on his
first night in France; the country girl in the moonlight, bending
over her sick soldier.

When they walked back across the square, over the crackling
leaves, the dance was breaking up. Oscar was playing "Home, Sweet
Home," for the last waltz.

"Le dernier baiser," said David. "Well, tomorrow we'll be gone,
and the chances are we won't come back this way."



XVIII

"With us it's always a feast or a famine," the men groaned, when
they sat down by the road to munch dry biscuit at noon. They had
covered eighteen miles that morning, and had still seven more to
go. They were ordered to do the twenty-five miles in eight hours.
Nobody had fallen out yet, but some of the boys looked pretty
well wilted. Nifty Jones said he was done for. Sergeant Hicks was
expostulating with the faint-hearted. He knew that if one man
fell out, a dozen would.

"If I can do it, you can. It's worse on a fat man like me. This
is no march to make a fuss about. Why, at Arras I talked with a
little Tommy from one of those Pal Battalions that got
slaughtered on the Somme. His battalion marched twenty-five miles
in six hours, in the heat of July, into certain death. They were
all kids out of school, not a man of them over five-foot-three,
called them the 'Bantams.' You've got to hand it to them,
fellows."

"I'll hand anything to anybody, but I can't go no farther on
these," Jones muttered, nursing his sore feet.

"Oh, you! We're going to heave you onto the only horse in the
Company. The officers, they can walk!"

When they got into Battalion lines there was food ready for them,
but very few wanted it. They drank and lay down in the bushes.
Claude went at once to Headquarters and found Barclay Owens, of
the Engineers, with the Colonel, who was smoking and studying his
maps as usual.

"Glad to see you, Wheeler. Your men ought to be in good shape,
after a week's rest. Let them sleep now. We've got to move out of
here before midnight, to relieve two Texas battalions at Moltke
trench. They've taken the trench with heavy casualties and are
beat out; couldn't hold it in case of counter-attack. As it's an
important point, the enemy will try to recover it. I want to get
into position before daylight, so he won't know fresh troops are
coming in. As ranking officer, you are in charge of the Company."

"Very well, sir. I'll do my best."

"I'm sure you will. Two machine gun teams are going up with us,
and some time tomorrow a Missouri battalion comes up to support.
I'd have had you over here before, but I only got my orders to
relieve yesterday. We may have to advance under shell fire. The
enemy has been putting a lot of big stuff over; he wants to cut
off that trench."

Claude and David got into a fresh shell hole, under the
half-burned scrub, and fell asleep. They were awakened at dusk by
heavy artillery fire from the north.

At ten o'clock the Battalion, after a hot meal, began to advance
through almost impassable country. The guns must have been
pounding away at the same range for a long while; the ground was
worked and kneaded until it was soft as dough, though no rain had
fallen for a week. Barclay Owens and his engineers were throwing
down a plank road to get food and the ammunition wagons across.
Big shells were coming over at intervals of twelve minutes. The
intervals were so regular that it was quite possible to get
forward without damage. While B Company was pulling through the
shell area, Colonel Scott overtook them, on foot, his orderly
leading his horse.

"Know anything about that light over there, Wheeler ?" he asked.
"Well, it oughtn't to be there. Come along and see."

The light was a mere match-head down in the ground, Claude hadn't
noticed it before. He followed the Colonel, and when they reached
the spark they found three officers of A Company crouching in a
shell crater, covered with a piece of sheet-iron.

"Put out that light," called the Colonel sharply. "What's the
matter, Captain Brace ?"

A young man rose quickly. "I'm waiting for the water, sir. It's
coming up on mules, in petrol cases, and I don't want to get
separated from it. The ground's so bad here the drivers are
likely to get lost."

"Don't wait more than twenty minutes. You must get up and take
your position on time, that's the important thing, water or no
water."

As the Colonel and Claude hurried back to overtake the Company,
five big shells screamed over them in rapid succession. "Run,
sir," the orderly called. "They're getting on to us; they've
shortened the range."

"That light back there was just enough to give them an idea," the
Colonel muttered.

The bad ground continued for about a mile, and then the advance
reached Headquarters, behind the eighth trench of the great
system of trenches. It was an old farmhouse which the Germans had
made over with reinforced concrete, lining it within and without,
until the walls were six feet thick and almost shell-proof, like
a pill-box. The Colonel sent his orderly to enquire about A
Company. A young Lieutenant came to the door of the farmhouse.

"A Company is ready to go into position, sir. I brought them
up."

"Where is Captain Brace, Lieutenant ?"

"He and both our first lieutenants were killed, Colonel. Back in
that hole. A shell fell on them not five minutes after you were
talking to them."

"That's bad. Any other damage ?"

"Yes, sir. There was a cook wagon struck at the same time; the
first one coming along Julius Caesar's new road. The driver was
killed, and we had to shoot the horses. Captain Owens, he near
got scalded with the stew."

The Colonel called in the officers one after another and
discussed their positions with them.

"Wheeler," he said when Claude's turn came, "you know your map ?
You've noticed that sharp loop in the front trench, in H 2; the
Boar's Head, I believe they call it. It's a sort of spear point
that reaches out toward the enemy, and it will be a hot place to
hold. If I put your company in there, do you think you can do the
Battalion credit in case of a counter attack ?"

Claude said he thought so.

"It's the nastiest bit of the line to hold, and you can tell your
men I pay them a compliment when I put them there."

"All right, sir. They'll appreciate it."

The Colonel bit off the end of a fresh cigar. "They'd better, by
thunder! If they give way and let the Hun bombers in, it will let
down the whole line. I'll give you two teams of Georgia machine
guns to put in that point they call the Boar's Snout. When the
Missourians come up tomorrow, they'll go in to support you, but
until then you'll have to take care of the loop yourselves. I've
got an awful lot of trench to hold, and I can't spare you any
more men."

The Texas men whom the Battalion came up to relieve had been
living for sixty hours on their iron rations, and on what they
could pick off the dead Huns. Their supplies had been shelled on
the way, and nothing had got through to them. When the Colonel
took Claude and Gerhardt forward to inspect the loop that B
Company was to hold, they found a wallow, more like a dump heap
than a trench. The men who had taken the position were almost too
weak to stand. All their officers had been killed, and a sergeant
was in command. He apologized for the condition of the loop.

"Sorry to leave such a mess for you to clean up, sir, but we got
it bad in here. He's been shelling us every night since we drove
him out. I couldn't ask the men to do anything but hold on."

"That's all right. You beat it, with your boys, quick! My men
will hand you out some grub as you go back."

The battered defenders of the Boar's Head stumbled past them
through the darkness into the communication. When the last man
had filed out, the Colonel sent for Barclay Owens. Claude and
David tried to feel their way about and get some idea of the
condition the place was in. The stench was the worst they had yet
encountered, but it was less disgusting than the flies; when they
inadvertently touched a dead body, clouds of wet, buzzing flies
flew up into their faces, into their eyes and nostrils. Under
their feet the earth worked and moved as if boa constrictors were
wriggling down there soft bodies, lightly covered. When they had
found their way up to the Snout they came upon a pile of corpses,
a dozen or more, thrown one on top of another like sacks of
flour, faintly discernible in the darkness. While the two
officers stood there, rumbling, squirting sounds began to come
from this heap, first from one body, then from another--gases,
swelling in the liquefying entrails of the dead men. They seemed
to be complaining to one another; glup, glup, glup.

The boys went back to the Colonel, who was standing at the mouth
of the communication, and told him there was nothing much to
report, except that the burying squad was needed badly.

"I expect!" The Colonel shook his head. When Barclay Owens
arrived, he asked him what could be done here before daybreak.
The doughty engineer felt his way about as Claude and Gerhardt
had done; they heard him coughing, and beating off the flies. But
when he came back he seemed rather cheered than discouraged.

"Give me a gang to get the casualties out, and with plenty of
quick-lime and concrete I can make this loop all right in four
hours, sir," he declared.

"I've brought plenty of lime, but where'll you get your
concrete ?"

"The Hun left about fifty sacks of it in the cellar, under your
Headquarters. I can do better, of course, if I have a few hours
more for my concrete to dry."

"Go ahead, Captain." The Colonel told Claude and David to bring
their men up to the communication before light, and hold them
ready. "Give Owens' cement a chance, but don't let the enemy put
over any surprise on you."

The shelling began again at daybreak; it was hardest on the rear
trenches and the three-mile area behind. Evidently the enemy felt
sure of what he had in Moltke trench; he wanted to cut off
supplies and possible reinforcements. The Missouri battalion did
not come up that day, but before noon a runner arrived from their
Colonel, with information that they were hiding in the wood. Five
Boche planes had been circling over the wood since dawn,
signalling to the enemy Headquarters back on Dauphin Ridge; the
Missourians were sure they had avoided detection by lying close
in the under-brush. They would come up in the night. Their
linemen were following the runner, and Colonel Scott would be in
telephone communication with them in half an hour.

When B Company moved into the Boar's Head at one o'clock in the
afternoon, they could truthfully say that the prevailing smell
was now that of quick-lime. The parapet was evenly built up, the
firing step had been partly restored, and in the Snout there were
good emplacements for the machine guns. Certain unpleasant
reminders were still to be found if one looked for them. In the
Snout a large fat boot stuck stiffly from the side of the trench.
Captain Ovens explained that the ground sounded hollow in there,
and the boot probably led back into a dugout where a lot of Hun
bodies were entombed together. As he was pressed for time, he had
thought best not to look for trouble. In one of the curves of the
loop, just at the top of the earth wall, under the sand bags, a
dark hand reached out; the five fingers, well apart, looked like
the swollen roots of some noxious weed. Hicks declared that this
object was disgusting, and during the afternoon he made Nifty
Jones and Oscar scrape down some earth and make a hump over the
paw. But there was shelling in the night, and the earth fell
away.

"Look," said Jones when he wakened his Sergeant. "The first thing
I seen when daylight come was his old fingers, wigglin' in the
breeze. He wants air, Heinie does; he won't stay covered."

Hicks got up and re-buried the hand himself, but when he came
around with Claude on inspection, before breakfast, there were
the same five fingers sticking out again. The Sergeant's forehead
puffed up and got red, and he swore that if he found the man who
played dirty jokes, he'd make him eat this one.

The Colonel sent for Claude and Gerhardt to come to breakfast
with him. He had been talking by telephone with the Missouri
officers and had agreed that they should stay back in the bush
for the present. The continual circling of planes over the wood
seemed to indicate that the enemy was concerned about the actual
strength of Moltke trench. It was possible their air scouts had
seen the Texas men going back,--otherwise, why were they holding
off ?

While the Colonel and the officers were at breakfast, a corporal
brought in two pigeons he had shot at dawn. One of them carried a
message under its wing. The Colonel unrolled a strip of paper and
handed it to Gerhardt.

"Yes, sir, it's in German, but it's code stuff. It's a German
nursery rhyme. Those reconnoitering planes must have dropped
scouts on our rear, and they are sending in reports. Of course,
they can get more on us than the air men can. Here, do you want
these birds, Dick ?"

The boy grinned. "You bet I do, sir! I may get a chance to fry
'em, later on."

After breakfast the Colonel went to inspect B Company in the
Boar's Head. He was especially pleased with the advantageous
placing of the machine guns in the Snout. "I expect you'll have a
quiet day," he said to the men, "but I wouldn't like to promise
you a quiet night. You'll have to be very steady in here; if
Fritz takes this loop, he's got us, you understand."

They had, indeed, a quiet day. Some of the men played cards, and
Oscar read his Bible. The night, too, began well. But at four
fifteen everybody was roused by the gas alarm. Gas shells came
over for exactly half an hour. Then the shrapnel broke loose;
not the long, whizzing scream of solitary shells, but drum-fire,
continuous and deafening. A hundred electrical storms seemed
raging at once, in the air and on the ground. Balls of fire were
rolling all over the place. The range was a little long for the
Boar's Head, they were not getting the worst of it; but thirty
yards back everything was torn to pieces. Claude didn't see how
anybody could be left alive back there. A single twister had
killed six of his men at the rear of the loop, where they were
shovelling to keep the communication clear. Captain Owns' neat
earthworks were being badly pounded.

Claude and Gerhardt were consulting together when the smoke and
darkness began to take on the livid colour that announced the
coming of daybreak. A messenger ran in from the Colonel; the
Missourians had not yet come up, and his telephone communication
with them was cut off. He was afraid they had got lost in the
bombardment. "The Colonel says you are to send two men back to
bring them up; two men who can take charge if they're stampeded."

When the messenger shouted this order, Gerhardt and Hicks looked
at each other quickly, and volunteered to go.

Claude hesitated. Hicks and David waited for no further consent;
they ran down the communication and disappeared.

Claude stood in the smoke that was slowly growing greyer, and
looked after them with the deepest stab of despair he had ever
known. Only a man who was bewildered and unfit to be in command
of other men would have let his best friend and his best officer
take such a risk. He was standing there under shelter, and his
two friends were going back through that curtain of flying steel,
toward the square from which the lost battalion had last
reported. If he knew them, they would not lose time following the
maze of trenches; they were probably even now out on the open,
running straight through the enemy barrage, vaulting trench tops.

Claude turned and went back into the loop. Well, whatever
happened, he had worked with brave men. It was worth having lived
in this world to have known such men. Soldiers, when they were in
a tight place, often made secret propositions to God; and now he
found himself offering terms: If They would see to it that David
came back, They could take the price out of him. He would pay.
Did They understand ?

An hour dragged by. Hard on the nerves, waiting. Up the
communication came a train with ammunition and coffee for the
loop. The men thought Headquarters did pretty well to get hot
food to them through that barrage. A message came up in the
Colonel's hand:

"Be ready when the barrage stops."

Claude took this up and showed it to the machine gunners in the
Snout. Turning back, he ran into Hicks, stripped to his shirt and
trousers, as wet as if he had come out of the river, and splashed
with blood. His hand was wrapped up in a rag. He put his mouth to
Claude's ear and shouted: "We found them. They were lost. They're
coming. Send word to the Colonel."

"Where's Gerhardt ?"

"He's coming; bringing them up. God, it's stopped!"

The bombardment ceased with a suddenness that was stupefying. The
men in the loop gasped and crouched as if they were falling from
a height. The air, rolling black with smoke and stifling with the
smell of gases and burning powder, was still as death. The
silence was like a heavy anaesthetic.

Claude ran back to the Snout to see that the gun teams were
ready. "Wake up, boys! You know why we're here!"

Bert Fuller, who was up in the look-out, dropped back into the
trench beside him. "They're coming, sir."

Claude gave the signal to the machine guns. Fire opened all along
the loop. In a moment a breeze sprang up, and the heavy smoke
clouds drifted to the rear. Mounting to the firestep, he peered
over. The enemy was coming on eight deep, on the left of the
Boar's Head, in long, waving lines that reached out toward the
main trench. Suddenly the advance was checked. The files of
running men dropped behind a wrinkle in the earth fifty yards
forward and did not instantly re-appear. It struck Claude that
they were waiting for something; he ought to be clever enough to
know for what, but he was not. The Colonel's line man came up to
him.

"Headquarters has a runner from the Missourians. They'll be up in
twenty minutes. The Colonel will put them in here at once. Till
then you must manage to hold."

"We'll hold. Fritz is behaving queerly. I don't understand his
tactics..."

While he was speaking, everything was explained. The Boar's Snout
spread apart with an explosion that split the earth, and went up
in a volcano of smoke and flame. Claude and the Colonel's
messenger were thrown on their faces. When they got to their
feet, the Snout was a smoking crater full of dead and dying men.
The Georgia gun teams were gone.

It was for this that the Hun advance had been waiting behind the
ridge. The mine under the Snout had been made long ago, probably,
on a venture, when the Hun held Moltke trench for months without
molestation. During the last twenty-four hours they had been
getting their explosives in, reasoning that the strongest
garrison would be placed there.

Here they were, coming on the run. It was up to the rifles. The
men who had been knocked down by the shock were all on their feet
again. They looked at their officer questioningly, as if the
whole situation had changed. Claude felt they were going soft
under his eyes. In a moment the Hun bombers would be in on them,
and they would break. He ran along the trench, pointing over the
sand bags and shouting, "It's up to you, it's up to you!"

The rifles recovered themselves and began firing, but Claude felt
they were spongy and uncertain, that their minds were already on
the way to the rear. If they did anything, it must be quick, and
their gun-work must be accurate. Nothing but a withering fire
could check.... He sprang to the firestep and then out on the
parapet. Something instantaneous happened; he had his men in
hand.

"Steady, steady!" He called the range to the rifle teams behind
him, and he could see the fire take effect. All along the Hun
lines men were stumbling and falling. They swerved a little to
the left; he called the rifles to follow, directing them with his
voice and with his hands. It was not only that from here he could
correct the range and direct the fire; the men behind him had
become like rock. That line of faces below; Hicks, Jones, Fuller,
Anderson, Oscar.... Their eyes never left him. With these men
he could do anything.

The right of the Hun line swerved out, not more than twenty yards
from the battered Snout, trying to run to shelter under that pile
of debris and human bodies. A quick concentration of rifle fire
depressed it, and the swell came out again toward the left.
Claude's appearance on the parapet had attracted no attention
from the enemy at first, but now the bullets began popping about
him; two rattled on his tin hat, one caught him in the shoulder.
The blood dripped down his coat, but he felt no weakness. He felt
only one thing; that he commanded wonderful men. When David came
up with the supports he might find them dead, but he would find
them all there. They were there to stay until they were carried
out to be buried. They were mortal, but they were unconquerable.

The Colonel's twenty minutes must be almost up, he thought. He
couldn't take his eyes from the front line long enough to look at
his wrist watch.... The men behind him saw Claude sway as if
he had lost his balance and were trying to recover it. Then he
plunged, face down, outside the parapet. Hicks caught his foot
and pulled him back. At the same moment the Missourians ran
yelling up the communication. They threw their machine guns up on
the sand bags and went into action without an unnecessary motion.

Hicks and Bert Fuller and Oscar carried Claude forward toward the
Snout, out of the way of the supports that were pouring in. He
was not bleeding very much. He smiled at them as if he were going
to speak, but there was a weak blankness in his eyes. Bert tore
his shirt open; three clean bullet holes. By the time they looked
at him again, the smile had gone... the look that was Claude
had faded. Hicks wiped the sweat and smoke from his officer's
face. "Thank God I never told him," he said. "Thank God for
that!"

Bert and Oscar knew what Hicks meant. Gerhardt had been blown to
pieces at his side when they dashed back through the enemy
barrage to find the Missourians. They were running together
across the open, not able to see much for smoke. They bumped into
a section of wire entanglement, left above an old trench. David
cut round to the right, waving Hicks to follow him. The two were
not ten yards apart when the shell struck. Then Sergeant Hicks
ran on alone.



XIX

The sun is sinking low, a transport is steaming slowly up the
narrows with the tide. The decks are covered with brown men. They
cluster over the superstructure like bees in swarming time. Their
attitudes are relaxed and lounging. Some look thoughtful, some
well contented, some are melancholy, and many are indifferent, as
they watch the shore approaching. They are not the same men who
went away.

Sergeant Hicks was standing in the stern, smoking, reflecting,
watching the twinkle of the red sunset upon the cloudy water. It
is more than a year since he sailed for France. The world has
changed in that time, and so has he.

Bert Fuller elbowed his way up to the Sergeant. "The doctor says
Colonel Maxey is dying, He won't live to get off the boat, much
less to ride in the parade in New York tomorrow."

Hicks shrugged, as if Maxey's pneumonia were no affair of his.
"Well, we should worry! We've left better officers than him over
there."

"I'm not saying we haven't. But it seems too bad, when he's so
strong for fuss and feathers. He's been sending cables about that
parade for weeks."

"Huh!" Hicks elevated his eyebrows and glanced sidewise in
disdain. Presently he sputtered, squinting down at the glittering
water, "Colonel Maxey, anyhow! Colonel for what Claude and
Gerhardt did, I guess!" Hicks and Bert Fuller have been helping
to keep the noble fortress of Ehrenbreitstein. They have always
hung together and are usually quarrelling and grumbling at each
other when they are off duty. Still, they hang together. They are
the last of their group. Nifty Jones and Oscar, God only knows
why, have gone on to the Black Sea.

During the year they were in the Rhine valley, Bert and Hicks
were separated only once, and that was when Hicks got a two
weeks' leave and, by dint of persevering and fatiguing travel,
went to Venice. He had no proper passport, and the consuls and
officials to whom he had appealed in his difficulties begged him
to content himself with something nearer. But he said he was
going to Venice because he had always heard about it. Bert Fuller
was glad to welcome him back to Coblentz, and gave a "wine party"
to celebrate his return. They expect to keep an eye on each
other. Though Bert lives on the Platte and Hicks on the Big Blue,
the automobile roads between those two rivers are excellent.

Bert is the same sweet-tempered boy he was when he left his
mother's kitchen; his gravest troubles have been frequent
betrothals. But Hicks' round, chubby face has taken on a slightly
cynical expression,--a look quite out of place there. The chances
of war have hurt his feelings... not that he ever wanted
anything for himself. The way in which glittering honours bump
down upon the wrong heads in the army, and palms and crosses
blossom on the wrong breasts, has, as he says, thrown his compass
off a few points.

What Hicks had wanted most in this world was to run a garage and
repair shop with his old chum, Dell Able. Beaufort ended all
that. He means to conduct a sort of memorial shop, anyhow, with
"Hicks and Able" over the door. He wants to roll up his sleeves
and look at the logical and beautiful inwards of automobiles for
the rest of his life.

As the transport enters the North River, sirens and steam
whistles all along the water front begin to blow their shrill
salute to the returning soldiers. The men square their shoulders
and smile knowingly at one another; some of them look a little
bored. Hicks slowly lights a cigarette and regards the end of it
with an expression which will puzzle his friends when he gets
home.

By the banks of Lovely Creek, where it began, Claude Wheeler's
story still goes on. To the two old women who work together in
the farmhouse, the thought of him is always there, beyond
everything else, at the farthest edge of consciousness, like the
evening sun on the horizon.

 Mrs. Wheeler got the word of his death one afternoon in the
sitting-room, the room in which he had bade her good-bye. She was
reading when the telephone rang.

"Is this the Wheeler farm ? This is the telegraph office at
Frankfort. We have a message from the War Department,--" the
voice hesitated. "Isn't Mr. Wheeler there ?"

"No, but you can read the message to me."

Mrs. Wheeler said, "Thank you," and hung up the receiver. She
felt her way softly to her chair. She had an hour alone, when
there was nothing but him in the room,--but him and the map
there, which was the end of his road. Somewhere among those
perplexing names, he had found his place.

Claude's letters kept coming for weeks afterward; then came the
letters from his comrades and his Colonel to tell her all.

In the dark months that followed, when human nature looked to her
uglier than it had ever done before, those letters were Mrs.
Wheeler's comfort. As she read the newspapers, she used to think
about the passage of the Red Sea, in the Bible; it seemed as if
the flood of meanness and greed had been held back just long
enough for the boys to go over, and then swept down and engulfed
everything that was left at home. When she can see nothing that
has come of it all but evil, she reads Claude's letters over
again and reassures herself; for him the call was clear, the
cause was glorious. Never a doubt stained his bright faith. She
divines so much that he did not write. She knows what to read
into those short flashes of enthusiasm; how fully he must have
found his life before he could let himself go so far--he, who was
so afraid of being fooled! He died believing his own country
better than it is, and France better than any country can ever
be. And those were beautiful beliefs to die with. Perhaps it was
as well to see that vision, and then to see no more. She would
have dreaded the awakening,--she sometimes even doubts whether he
could have borne at all that last, desolating disappointment. One
by one the heroes of that war, the men of dazzling soldiership,
leave prematurely the world they have come back to. Airmen whose
deeds were tales of wonder, officers whose names made the blood
of youth beat faster, survivors of incredible dangers,--one by
one they quietly die by their own hand. Some do it in obscure
lodging houses, some in their office, where they seemed to be
carrying on their business like other men. Some slip over a
vessel's side and disappear into the sea. When Claude's mother
hears of these things, she shudders and presses her hands tight
over her breast, as if she had him there. She feels as if God had
saved him from some horrible suffering, some horrible end. For as
she reads, she thinks those slayers of themselves were all so
like him; they were the ones who had hoped extravagantly,--who in
order to do what they did had to hope extravagantly, and to
believe passionately. And they found they had hoped and believed
too much. But one she knew, who could ill bear disillusion...
safe, safe.

Mahailey, when they are alone, sometimes addresses Mrs. Wheeler
as "Mudder"; "Now, Mudder, you go upstairs an' lay down an' rest
yourself." Mrs. Wheeler knows that then she is thinking of
Claude, is speaking for Claude. As they are working at the table
or bending over the oven, something reminds them of him, and they
think of him together, like one person: Mahailey will pat her
back and say, "Never you mind, Mudder; you'll see your boy up
yonder." Mrs. Wheeler always feels that God is near,--but
Mahailey is not troubled by any knowledge of interstellar spaces,
and for her He is nearer still,--directly overhead, not so very
far above the kitchen stove.

FRIENDS OF CHILDHOOD


Dr. Howard Archie had just come up from a game of pool with the Jewish
clothier and two traveling men who happened to be staying overnight in
Moonstone. His offices were in the Duke Block, over the drug store.
Larry, the doctor's man, had lit the overhead light in the waiting-room
and the double student's lamp on the desk in the study. The isinglass
sides of the hard-coal burner were aglow, and the air in the study was
so hot that as he came in the doctor opened the door into his little
operating-room, where there was no stove. The waiting room was carpeted
and stiffly furnished, something like a country parlor. The study had
worn, unpainted floors, but there was a look of winter comfort about it.
The doctor's flat-top desk was large and well made; the papers were in
orderly piles, under glass weights. Behind the stove a wide bookcase,
with double glass doors, reached from the floor to the ceiling. It was
filled with medical books of every thickness and color. On the top shelf
stood a long row of thirty or forty volumes, bound all alike in dark
mottled board covers, with imitation leather backs.

As the doctor in New England villages is proverbially old, so the doctor
in small Colorado towns twenty-five years ago was generally young.
Dr. Archie was barely thirty. He was tall, with massive shoulders
which he held stiffly, and a large, well-shaped head. He was a
distinguished-looking man, for that part of the world, at least.

There was something individual in the way in which his reddish-brown
hair, parted cleanly at the side, bushed over his high forehead. His
nose was straight and thick, and his eyes were intelligent. He wore a
curly, reddish mustache and an imperial, cut trimly, which made him look
a little like the pictures of Napoleon III. His hands were large and
well kept, but ruggedly formed, and the backs were shaded with crinkly
reddish hair. He wore a blue suit of woolly, wide-waled serge; the
traveling men had known at a glance that it was made by a Denver tailor.
The doctor was always well dressed.

Dr. Archie turned up the student's lamp and sat down in the swivel chair
before his desk. He sat uneasily, beating a tattoo on his knees with his
fingers, and looked about him as if he were bored. He glanced at his
watch, then absently took from his pocket a bunch of small keys,
selected one and looked at it. A contemptuous smile, barely perceptible,
played on his lips, but his eyes remained meditative. Behind the door
that led into the hall, under his buffalo-skin driving-coat, was a locked
cupboard. This the doctor opened mechanically, kicking aside a pile of
muddy overshoes. Inside, on the shelves, were whiskey glasses and
decanters, lemons, sugar, and bitters. Hearing a step in the empty,
echoing hall without, the doctor closed the cupboard again, snapping the
Yale lock. The door of the waiting-room opened, a man entered and came
on into the consulting-room.

“Good-evening, Mr. Kronborg,” said the doctor carelessly. “Sit down.”

His visitor was a tall, loosely built man, with a thin brown beard,
streaked with gray. He wore a frock coat, a broad-brimmed black hat, a
white lawn necktie, and steel rimmed spectacles. Altogether there was a
pretentious and important air about him, as he lifted the skirts of his
coat and sat down.

“Good-evening, doctor. Can you step around to the house with me ? I think
Mrs. Kronborg will need you this evening.” This was said with profound
gravity and, curiously enough, with a slight embarrassment.

“Any hurry ?” the doctor asked over his shoulder as he went into his
operating-room.

Mr. Kronborg coughed behind his hand, and contracted his brows. His face
threatened at every moment to break into a smile of foolish excitement.
He controlled it only by calling upon his habitual pulpit manner. “Well,
I think it would be as well to go immediately. Mrs. Kronborg will be
more comfortable if you are there. She has been suffering for some
time.”

The doctor came back and threw a black bag upon his desk. He wrote some
instructions for his man on a prescription pad and then drew on his
overcoat. “All ready,” he announced, putting out his lamp. Mr. Kronborg
rose and they tramped through the empty hall and down the stairway to
the street. The drug store below was dark, and the saloon next door was
just closing. Every other light on Main Street was out.

On either side of the road and at the outer edge of the board sidewalk,
the snow had been shoveled into breastworks. The town looked small and
black, flattened down in the snow, muffled and all but extinguished.
Overhead the stars shone gloriously. It was impossible not to notice
them. The air was so clear that the white sand hills to the east of
Moonstone gleamed softly. Following the Reverend Mr. Kronborg along the
narrow walk, past the little dark, sleeping houses, the doctor looked up
at the flashing night and whistled softly. It did seem that people were
stupider than they need be; as if on a night like this there ought to be
something better to do than to sleep nine hours, or to assist Mrs.
Kronborg in functions which she could have performed so admirably
unaided. He wished he had gone down to Denver to hear Fay Templeton sing
“See-Saw.” Then he remembered that he had a personal interest in this
family, after all. They turned into another street and saw before them
lighted windows; a low story-and-a-half house, with a wing built on at
the right and a kitchen addition at the back, everything a little on the
slant--roofs, windows, and doors. As they approached the gate, Peter
Kronborg's pace grew brisker. His nervous, ministerial cough annoyed the
doctor. “Exactly as if he were going to give out a text,” he thought. He
drew off his glove and felt in his vest pocket. “Have a troche,
Kronborg,” he said, producing some. “Sent me for samples. Very good for
a rough throat.”

“Ah, thank you, thank you. I was in something of a hurry. I neglected to
put on my overshoes. Here we are, doctor.” Kronborg opened his front
door--seemed delighted to be at home again.

The front hall was dark and cold; the hatrack was hung with an
astonishing number of children's hats and caps and cloaks. They were
even piled on the table beneath the hatrack. Under the table was a heap
of rubbers and overshoes. While the doctor hung up his coat and hat,
Peter Kronborg opened the door into the living-room. A glare of light
greeted them, and a rush of hot, stale air, smelling of warming
flannels.

At three o'clock in the morning Dr. Archie was in the parlor putting on
his cuffs and coat--there was no spare bedroom in that house. Peter
Kronborg's seventh child, a boy, was being soothed and cosseted by his
aunt, Mrs. Kronborg was asleep, and the doctor was going home. But he
wanted first to speak to Kronborg, who, coatless and fluttery, was
pouring coal into the kitchen stove. As the doctor crossed the
dining-room he paused and listened. From one of the wing rooms, off to
the left, he heard rapid, distressed breathing. He went to the kitchen
door.

“One of the children sick in there ?” he asked, nodding toward the
partition.

Kronborg hung up the stove-lifter and dusted his fingers. “It must be
Thea. I meant to ask you to look at her. She has a croupy cold. But in
my excitement--Mrs. Kronborg is doing finely, eh, doctor ? Not many of
your patients with such a constitution, I expect.”

“Oh, yes. She's a fine mother.” The doctor took up the lamp from the
kitchen table and unceremoniously went into the wing room. Two chubby
little boys were asleep in a double bed, with the coverlids over their
noses and their feet drawn up. In a single bed, next to theirs, lay a
little girl of eleven, wide awake, two yellow braids sticking up on the
pillow behind her. Her face was scarlet and her eyes were blazing.

The doctor shut the door behind him. “Feel pretty sick, Thea ?” he asked
as he took out his thermometer. “Why didn't you call somebody ?”

She looked at him with greedy affection. “I thought you were here,” she
spoke between quick breaths. “There is a new baby, isn't there ? Which ?”

“Which ?” repeated the doctor.

“Brother or sister ?”

He smiled and sat down on the edge of the bed. “Brother,” he said,
taking her hand. “Open.”

“Good. Brothers are better,” she murmured as he put the glass tube under
her tongue.

“Now, be still, I want to count.” Dr. Archie reached for her hand and
took out his watch. When he put her hand back under the quilt he went
over to one of the windows--they were both tight shut--and lifted it a
little way. He reached up and ran his hand along the cold, unpapered
wall. “Keep under the covers; I'll come back to you in a moment,” he
said, bending over the glass lamp with his thermometer. He winked at her
from the door before he shut it.

Peter Kronborg was sitting in his wife's room, holding the bundle which
contained his son. His air of cheerful importance, his beard and
glasses, even his shirt-sleeves, annoyed the doctor. He beckoned
Kronborg into the living-room and said sternly:--

“You've got a very sick child in there. Why didn't you call me before ?
It's pneumonia, and she must have been sick for several days. Put the
baby down somewhere, please, and help me make up the bed-lounge here in
the parlor. She's got to be in a warm room, and she's got to be quiet.
You must keep the other children out. Here, this thing opens up, I see,”
 swinging back the top of the carpet lounge. “We can lift her mattress
and carry her in just as she is. I don't want to disturb her more than
is necessary.”

Kronborg was all concern immediately. The two men took up the mattress
and carried the sick child into the parlor. “I'll have to go down to my
office to get some medicine, Kronborg. The drug store won't be open.
Keep the covers on her. I won't be gone long. Shake down the stove and
put on a little coal, but not too much; so it'll catch quickly, I mean.
Find an old sheet for me, and put it there to warm.”

The doctor caught his coat and hurried out into the dark street. Nobody
was stirring yet, and the cold was bitter. He was tired and hungry and
in no mild humor. “The idea!” he muttered; “to be such an ass at his
age, about the seventh! And to feel no responsibility about the little
girl. Silly old goat! The baby would have got into the world somehow;
they always do. But a nice little girl like that--she's worth the whole
litter. Where she ever got it from--” He turned into the Duke Block and
ran up the stairs to his office.

Thea Kronborg, meanwhile, was wondering why she happened to be in the
parlor, where nobody but company--usually visiting preachers--ever
slept. She had moments of stupor when she did not see anything, and
moments of excitement when she felt that something unusual and pleasant
was about to happen, when she saw everything clearly in the red light
from the isinglass sides of the hard-coal burner--the nickel trimmings
on the stove itself, the pictures on the wall, which she thought very
beautiful, the flowers on the Brussels carpet, Czerny's “Daily Studies”
 which stood open on the upright piano. She forgot, for the time being,
all about the new baby.

When she heard the front door open, it occurred to her that the pleasant
thing which was going to happen was Dr. Archie himself. He came in and
warmed his hands at the stove. As he turned to her, she threw herself
wearily toward him, half out of her bed. She would have tumbled to the
floor had he not caught her. He gave her some medicine and went to the
kitchen for something he needed. She drowsed and lost the sense of his
being there. When she opened her eyes again, he was kneeling before the
stove, spreading something dark and sticky on a white cloth, with a big
spoon; batter, perhaps. Presently she felt him taking off her nightgown.
He wrapped the hot plaster about her chest. There seemed to be straps
which he pinned over her shoulders. Then he took out a thread and needle
and began to sew her up in it. That, she felt, was too strange; she must
be dreaming anyhow, so she succumbed to her drowsiness.

Thea had been moaning with every breath since the doctor came back, but
she did not know it. She did not realize that she was suffering pain.
When she was conscious at all, she seemed to be separated from her body;
to be perched on top of the piano, or on the hanging lamp, watching the
doctor sew her up. It was perplexing and unsatisfactory, like dreaming.
She wished she could waken up and see what was going on.

The doctor thanked God that he had persuaded Peter Kronborg to keep out
of the way. He could do better by the child if he had her to himself. He
had no children of his own. His marriage was a very unhappy one. As he
lifted and undressed Thea, he thought to himself what a beautiful thing
a little girl's body was,--like a flower. It was so neatly and
delicately fashioned, so soft, and so milky white. Thea must have got
her hair and her silky skin from her mother. She was a little Swede,
through and through. Dr. Archie could not help thinking how he would
cherish a little creature like this if she were his. Her hands, so
little and hot, so clever, too,--he glanced at the open exercise book on
the piano. When he had stitched up the flaxseed jacket, he wiped it
neatly about the edges, where the paste had worked out on the skin. He
put on her the clean nightgown he had warmed before the fire, and tucked
the blankets about her. As he pushed back the hair that had fuzzed down
over her eyebrows, he felt her head thoughtfully with the tips of his
fingers. No, he couldn't say that it was different from any other
child's head, though he believed that there was something very different
about her. He looked intently at her wide, flushed face, freckled nose,
fierce little mouth, and her delicate, tender chin--the one soft touch
in her hard little Scandinavian face, as if some fairy godmother had
caressed her there and left a cryptic promise. Her brows were usually
drawn together defiantly, but never when she was with Dr. Archie. Her
affection for him was prettier than most of the things that went to make
up the doctor's life in Moonstone.

The windows grew gray. He heard a tramping on the attic floor, on the
back stairs, then cries: “Give me my shirt!” “Where's my other
stocking ?”

“I'll have to stay till they get off to school,” he reflected, “or
they'll be in here tormenting her, the whole lot of them.”




II

For the next four days it seemed to Dr. Archie that his patient might
slip through his hands, do what he might. But she did not. On the
contrary, after that she recovered very rapidly. As her father remarked,
she must have inherited the “constitution” which he was never tired of
admiring in her mother.

One afternoon, when her new brother was a week old, the doctor found
Thea very comfortable and happy in her bed in the parlor. The sunlight
was pouring in over her shoulders, the baby was asleep on a pillow in a
big rocking-chair beside her. Whenever he stirred, she put out her hand
and rocked him. Nothing of him was visible but a flushed, puffy forehead
and an uncompromisingly big, bald cranium. The door into her mother's
room stood open, and Mrs. Kronborg was sitting up in bed darning
stockings. She was a short, stalwart woman, with a short neck and a
determined-looking head. Her skin was very fair, her face calm and
unwrinkled, and her yellow hair, braided down her back as she lay in
bed, still looked like a girl's. She was a woman whom Dr. Archie
respected; active, practical, unruffled; goodhumored, but determined.
Exactly the sort of woman to take care of a flighty preacher. She had
brought her husband some property, too,--one fourth of her father's
broad acres in Nebraska,--but this she kept in her own name. She had
profound respect for her husband's erudition and eloquence. She sat
under his preaching with deep humility, and was as much taken in by his
stiff shirt and white neckties as if she had not ironed them herself by
lamplight the night before they appeared correct and spotless in the
pulpit. But for all this, she had no confidence in his administration of
worldly affairs. She looked to him for morning prayers and grace at
table; she expected him to name the babies and to supply whatever
parental sentiment there was in the house, to remember birthdays and
anniversaries, to point the children to moral and patriotic ideals. It
was her work to keep their bodies, their clothes, and their conduct in
some sort of order, and this she accomplished with a success that was a
source of wonder to her neighbors. As she used to remark, and her
husband admiringly to echo, she “had never lost one.” With all his
flightiness, Peter Kronborg appreciated the matter-of-fact, punctual way
in which his wife got her children into the world and along in it. He
believed, and he was right in believing, that the sovereign State of
Colorado was much indebted to Mrs. Kronborg and women like her.

Mrs. Kronborg believed that the size of every family was decided in
heaven. More modern views would not have startled her; they would simply
have seemed foolish--thin chatter, like the boasts of the men who built
the tower of Babel, or like Axel's plan to breed ostriches in the
chicken yard. From what evidence Mrs. Kronborg formed her opinions on
this and other matters, it would have been difficult to say, but once
formed, they were unchangeable. She would no more have questioned her
convictions than she would have questioned revelation. Calm and even
tempered, naturally kind, she was capable of strong prejudices, and she
never forgave.

When the doctor came in to see Thea, Mrs. Kronborg was reflecting that
the washing was a week behind, and deciding what she had better do about
it. The arrival of a new baby meant a revision of her entire domestic
schedule, and as she drove her needle along she had been working out new
sleeping arrangements and cleaning days. The doctor had entered the
house without knocking, after making noise enough in the hall to prepare
his patients. Thea was reading, her book propped up before her in the
sunlight.

“Mustn't do that; bad for your eyes,” he said, as Thea shut the book
quickly and slipped it under the covers.

Mrs. Kronborg called from her bed: “Bring the baby here, doctor, and
have that chair. She wanted him in there for company.”

Before the doctor picked up the baby, he put a yellow paper bag down on
Thea's coverlid and winked at her. They had a code of winks and
grimaces. When he went in to chat with her mother, Thea opened the bag
cautiously, trying to keep it from crackling. She drew out a long bunch
of white grapes, with a little of the sawdust in which they had been
packed still clinging to them. They were called Malaga grapes in
Moonstone, and once or twice during the winter the leading grocer got a
keg of them. They were used mainly for table decoration, about
Christmas-time. Thea had never had more than one grape at a time before.
When the doctor came back she was holding the almost transparent fruit
up in the sunlight, feeling the pale-green skins softly with the tips of
her fingers. She did not thank him; she only snapped her eyes at him in
a special way which he understood, and, when he gave her his hand, put
it quickly and shyly under her cheek, as if she were trying to do so
without knowing it--and without his knowing it.

Dr. Archie sat down in the rocking-chair. “And how's Thea feeling
to-day ?”

He was quite as shy as his patient, especially when a third person
overheard his conversation. Big and handsome and superior to his fellow
townsmen as Dr. Archie was, he was seldom at his ease, and like Peter
Kronborg he often dodged behind a professional manner. There was
sometimes a contraction of embarrassment and self consciousness all over
his big body, which made him awkward--likely to stumble, to kick up
rugs, or to knock over chairs. If any one was very sick, he forgot
himself, but he had a clumsy touch in convalescent gossip.

Thea curled up on her side and looked at him with pleasure. “All right.
I like to be sick. I have more fun then than other times.”

“How's that ?”

“I don't have to go to school, and I don't have to practice. I can read
all I want to, and have good things,”--she patted the grapes. “I had
lots of fun that time I mashed my finger and you wouldn't let Professor
Wunsch make me practice. Only I had to do left hand, even then. I think
that was mean.”

The doctor took her hand and examined the forefinger, where the nail had
grown back a little crooked. “You mustn't trim it down close at the
corner there, and then it will grow straight. You won't want it crooked
when you're a big girl and wear rings and have sweethearts.”

She made a mocking little face at him and looked at his new scarf-pin.
“That's the prettiest one you ev-ER had. I wish you'd stay a long while
and let me look at it. What is it ?”

Dr. Archie laughed. “It's an opal. Spanish Johnny brought it up for me
from Chihuahua in his shoe. I had it set in Denver, and I wore it to-day
for your benefit.”

Thea had a curious passion for jewelry. She wanted every shining stone
she saw, and in summer she was always going off into the sand hills to
hunt for crystals and agates and bits of pink chalcedony. She had two
cigar boxes full of stones that she had found or traded for, and she
imagined that they were of enormous value. She was always planning how
she would have them set.

“What are you reading ?” The doctor reached under the covers and pulled
out a book of Byron's poems. “Do you like this ?”

She looked confused, turned over a few pages rapidly, and pointed to “My
native land, good-night.” “That,” she said sheepishly.

“How about 'Maid of Athens' ?”

She blushed and looked at him suspiciously. “I like 'There was a sound
of revelry,'” she muttered.

The doctor laughed and closed the book. It was clumsily bound in padded
leather and had been presented to the Reverend Peter Kronborg by his
Sunday-School class as an ornament for his parlor table.

“Come into the office some day, and I'll lend you a nice book. You can
skip the parts you don't understand. You can read it in vacation.
Perhaps you'll be able to understand all of it by then.”

Thea frowned and looked fretfully toward the piano. “In vacation I have
to practice four hours every day, and then there'll be Thor to take care
of.” She pronounced it “Tor.”

“Thor ? Oh, you've named the baby Thor ?” exclaimed the doctor.

Thea frowned again, still more fiercely, and said quickly, “That's a
nice name, only maybe it's a little--old fashioned.” She was very
sensitive about being thought a foreigner, and was proud of the fact
that, in town, her father always preached in English; very bookish
English, at that, one might add.

Born in an old Scandinavian colony in Minnesota, Peter Kronborg had been
sent to a small divinity school in Indiana by the women of a Swedish
evangelical mission, who were convinced of his gifts and who skimped and
begged and gave church suppers to get the long, lazy youth through the
seminary. He could still speak enough Swedish to exhort and to bury the
members of his country church out at Copper Hole, and he wielded in his
Moonstone pulpit a somewhat pompous English vocabulary he had learned
out of books at college. He always spoke of “the infant Saviour,” “our
Heavenly Father,” etc. The poor man had no natural, spontaneous human
speech. If he had his sincere moments, they were perforce inarticulate.
Probably a good deal of his pretentiousness was due to the fact that he
habitually expressed himself in a book learned language, wholly remote
from anything personal, native, or homely. Mrs. Kronborg spoke Swedish
to her own sisters and to her sister-in-law Tillie, and colloquial
English to her neighbors. Thea, who had a rather sensitive ear, until
she went to school never spoke at all, except in monosyllables, and her
mother was convinced that she was tongue-tied. She was still inept in
speech for a child so intelligent. Her ideas were usually clear, but she
seldom attempted to explain them, even at school, where she excelled in
“written work” and never did more than mutter a reply.

“Your music professor stopped me on the street to-day and asked me how
you were,” said the doctor, rising. “He'll be sick himself, trotting
around in this slush with no overcoat or overshoes.”

“He's poor,” said Thea simply.

The doctor sighed. “I'm afraid he's worse than that. Is he always all
right when you take your lessons ? Never acts as if he'd been drinking ?”

Thea looked angry and spoke excitedly. “He knows a lot. More than
anybody. I don't care if he does drink; he's old and poor.” Her voice
shook a little.

Mrs. Kronborg spoke up from the next room. “He's a good teacher, doctor.
It's good for us he does drink. He'd never be in a little place like
this if he didn't have some weakness. These women that teach music
around here don't know nothing. I wouldn't have my child wasting time
with them. If Professor Wunsch goes away, Thea'll have nobody to take
from. He's careful with his scholars; he don't use bad language. Mrs.
Kohler is always present when Thea takes her lesson. It's all right.”
 Mrs. Kronborg spoke calmly and judicially. One could see that she had
thought the matter out before.

“I'm glad to hear that, Mrs. Kronborg. I wish we could get the old man
off his bottle and keep him tidy. Do you suppose if I gave you an old
overcoat you could get him to wear it ?” The doctor went to the bedroom
door and Mrs. Kronborg looked up from her darning.

“Why, yes, I guess he'd be glad of it. He'll take most anything from me.
He won't buy clothes, but I guess he'd wear 'em if he had 'em. I've
never had any clothes to give him, having so many to make over for.”

“I'll have Larry bring the coat around to-night. You aren't cross with
me, Thea ?” taking her hand.

Thea grinned warmly. “Not if you give Professor Wunsch a coat--and
things,” she tapped the grapes significantly. The doctor bent over and
kissed her.




III

Being sick was all very well, but Thea knew from experience that
starting back to school again was attended by depressing difficulties.
One Monday morning she got up early with Axel and Gunner, who shared her
wing room, and hurried into the back living-room, between the
dining-room and the kitchen. There, beside a soft-coal stove, the
younger children of the family undressed at night and dressed in the
morning. The older daughter, Anna, and the two big boys slept upstairs,
where the rooms were theoretically warmed by stovepipes from below. The
first (and the worst!) thing that confronted Thea was a suit of clean,
prickly red flannel, fresh from the wash. Usually the torment of
breaking in a clean suit of flannel came on Sunday, but yesterday, as
she was staying in the house, she had begged off. Their winter underwear
was a trial to all the children, but it was bitterest to Thea because
she happened to have the most sensitive skin. While she was tugging it
on, her Aunt Tillie brought in warm water from the boiler and filled the
tin pitcher. Thea washed her face, brushed and braided her hair, and got
into her blue cashmere dress. Over this she buttoned a long apron, with
sleeves, which would not be removed until she put on her cloak to go to
school. Gunner and Axel, on the soap box behind the stove, had their
usual quarrel about which should wear the tightest stockings, but they
exchanged reproaches in low tones, for they were wholesomely afraid of
Mrs. Kronborg's rawhide whip. She did not chastise her children often,
but she did it thoroughly. Only a somewhat stern system of discipline
could have kept any degree of order and quiet in that overcrowded house.

Mrs. Kronborg's children were all trained to dress themselves at the
earliest possible age, to make their own beds,--the boys as well as the
girls,--to take care of their clothes, to eat what was given them, and
to keep out of the way. Mrs. Kronborg would have made a good chess
player; she had a head for moves and positions.

Anna, the elder daughter, was her mother's lieutenant. All the children
knew that they must obey Anna, who was an obstinate contender for
proprieties and not always fair minded. To see the young Kronborgs
headed for Sunday School was like watching a military drill. Mrs.
Kronborg let her children's minds alone. She did not pry into their
thoughts or nag them. She respected them as individuals, and outside of
the house they had a great deal of liberty. But their communal life was
definitely ordered.

In the winter the children breakfasted in the kitchen; Gus and Charley
and Anna first, while the younger children were dressing. Gus was
nineteen and was a clerk in a dry-goods store. Charley, eighteen months
younger, worked in a feed store. They left the house by the kitchen door
at seven o'clock, and then Anna helped her Aunt Tillie get the breakfast
for the younger ones. Without the help of this sister-in-law, Tillie
Kronborg, Mrs. Kronborg's life would have been a hard one. Mrs. Kronborg
often reminded Anna that “no hired help would ever have taken the same
interest.”

Mr. Kronborg came of a poorer stock than his wife; from a lowly,
ignorant family that had lived in a poor part of Sweden. His
great-grandfather had gone to Norway to work as a farm laborer and had
married a Norwegian girl. This strain of Norwegian blood came out
somewhere in each generation of the Kronborgs. The intemperance of one
of Peter Kronborg's uncles, and the religious mania of another, had been
alike charged to the Norwegian grandmother. Both Peter Kronborg and his
sister Tillie were more like the Norwegian root of the family than like
the Swedish, and this same Norwegian strain was strong in Thea, though
in her it took a very different character.

Tillie was a queer, addle-pated thing, as flighty as a girl at
thirty-five, and overweeningly fond of gay clothes--which taste, as Mrs.
Kronborg philosophically said, did nobody any harm. Tillie was always
cheerful, and her tongue was still for scarcely a minute during the day.
She had been cruelly overworked on her father's Minnesota farm when she
was a young girl, and she had never been so happy as she was now; had
never before, as she said, had such social advantages. She thought her
brother the most important man in Moonstone. She never missed a church
service, and, much to the embarrassment of the children, she always
“spoke a piece” at the Sunday-School concerts. She had a complete set of
“Standard Recitations,” which she conned on Sundays. This morning, when
Thea and her two younger brothers sat down to breakfast, Tillie was
remonstrating with Gunner because he had not learned a recitation
assigned to him for George Washington Day at school. The unmemorized
text lay heavily on Gunner's conscience as he attacked his buckwheat
cakes and sausage. He knew that Tillie was in the right, and that “when
the day came he would be ashamed of himself.”

“I don't care,” he muttered, stirring his coffee; “they oughtn't to make
boys speak. It's all right for girls. They like to show off.”

“No showing off about it. Boys ought to like to speak up for their
country. And what was the use of your father buying you a new suit, if
you're not going to take part in anything ?”

“That was for Sunday-School. I'd rather wear my old one, anyhow. Why
didn't they give the piece to Thea ?” Gunner grumbled.

Tillie was turning buckwheat cakes at the griddle. “Thea can play and
sing, she don't need to speak. But you've got to know how to do
something, Gunner, that you have. What are you going to do when you git
big and want to git into society, if you can't do nothing ? Everybody'll
say, 'Can you sing ? Can you play ? Can you speak ? Then git right out of
society.' An' that's what they'll say to you, Mr. Gunner.”

Gunner and Alex grinned at Anna, who was preparing her mother's
breakfast. They never made fun of Tillie, but they understood well
enough that there were subjects upon which her ideas were rather
foolish. When Tillie struck the shallows, Thea was usually prompt in
turning the conversation.

“Will you and Axel let me have your sled at recess ?” she asked.

“All the time ?” asked Gunner dubiously.

“I'll work your examples for you to-night, if you do.”

“Oh, all right. There'll be a lot of 'em.”

“I don't mind, I can work 'em fast. How about yours, Axel ?”

Axel was a fat little boy of seven, with pretty, lazy blue eyes. “I
don't care,” he murmured, buttering his last buckwheat cake without
ambition; “too much trouble to copy 'em down. Jenny Smiley'll let me
have hers.”

The boys were to pull Thea to school on their sled, as the snow was
deep. The three set off together. Anna was now in the high school, and
she no longer went with the family party, but walked to school with some
of the older girls who were her friends, and wore a hat, not a hood like
Thea.




IV

“And it was Summer, beautiful Summer!” Those were the closing words of
Thea's favorite fairy tale, and she thought of them as she ran out into
the world one Saturday morning in May, her music book under her arm. She
was going to the Kohlers' to take her lesson, but she was in no hurry.

It was in the summer that one really lived. Then all the little
overcrowded houses were opened wide, and the wind blew through them with
sweet, earthy smells of garden-planting. The town looked as if it had
just been washed. People were out painting their fences. The cottonwood
trees were a-flicker with sticky, yellow little leaves, and the feathery
tamarisks were in pink bud. With the warm weather came freedom for
everybody. People were dug up, as it were. The very old people, whom one
had not seen all winter, came out and sunned themselves in the yard. The
double windows were taken off the houses, the tormenting flannels in
which children had been encased all winter were put away in boxes, and
the youngsters felt a pleasure in the cool cotton things next their
skin.

Thea had to walk more than a mile to reach the Kohlers' house, a very
pleasant mile out of town toward the glittering sand hills,--yellow this
morning, with lines of deep violet where the clefts and valleys were.
She followed the sidewalk to the depot at the south end of the town;
then took the road east to the little group of adobe houses where the
Mexicans lived, then dropped into a deep ravine; a dry sand creek,
across which the railroad track ran on a trestle. Beyond that gulch, on
a little rise of ground that faced the open sandy plain, was the
Kohlers' house, where Professor Wunsch lived. Fritz Kohler was the town
tailor, one of the first settlers. He had moved there, built a little
house and made a garden, when Moonstone was first marked down on the
map. He had three sons, but they now worked on the railroad and were
stationed in distant cities. One of them had gone to work for the Santa
Fe, and lived in New Mexico.

Mrs. Kohler seldom crossed the ravine and went into the town except at
Christmas-time, when she had to buy presents and Christmas cards to send
to her old friends in Freeport, Illinois. As she did not go to church,
she did not possess such a thing as a hat. Year after year she wore the
same red hood in winter and a black sunbonnet in summer. She made her
own dresses; the skirts came barely to her shoe-tops, and were gathered
as full as they could possibly be to the waistband. She preferred men's
shoes, and usually wore the cast-offs of one of her sons. She had never
learned much English, and her plants and shrubs were her companions. She
lived for her men and her garden. Beside that sand gulch, she had tried
to reproduce a bit of her own village in the Rhine Valley. She hid
herself behind the growth she had fostered, lived under the shade of
what she had planted and watered and pruned. In the blaze of the open
plain she was stupid and blind like an owl. Shade, shade; that was what
she was always planning and making. Behind the high tamarisk hedge, her
garden was a jungle of verdure in summer. Above the cherry trees and
peach trees and golden plums stood the windmill, with its tank on
stilts, which kept all this verdure alive. Outside, the sage-brush grew
up to the very edge of the garden, and the sand was always drifting up
to the tamarisks.

Every one in Moonstone was astonished when the Kohlers took the
wandering music-teacher to live with them. In seventeen years old Fritz
had never had a crony, except the harness-maker and Spanish Johnny. This
Wunsch came from God knew where,--followed Spanish Johnny into town when
that wanderer came back from one of his tramps. Wunsch played in the
dance orchestra, tuned pianos, and gave lessons. When Mrs. Kohler
rescued him, he was sleeping in a dirty, unfurnished room over one of
the saloons, and he had only two shirts in the world. Once he was under
her roof, the old woman went at him as she did at her garden. She sewed
and washed and mended for him, and made him so clean and respectable
that he was able to get a large class of pupils and to rent a piano. As
soon as he had money ahead, he sent to the Narrow Gauge lodging-house,
in Denver, for a trunkful of music which had been held there for unpaid
board. With tears in his eyes the old man--he was not over fifty, but
sadly battered--told Mrs. Kohler that he asked nothing better of God
than to end his days with her, and to be buried in the garden, under her
linden trees. They were not American basswood, but the European linden,
which has honey-colored blooms in summer, with a fragrance that
surpasses all trees and flowers and drives young people wild with joy.

Thea was reflecting as she walked along that had it not been for
Professor Wunsch she might have lived on for years in Moonstone without
ever knowing the Kohlers, without ever seeing their garden or the inside
of their house. Besides the cuckoo clock,--which was wonderful enough,
and which Mrs. Kohler said she kept for “company when she was
lonesome,”--the Kohlers had in their house the most wonderful thing Thea
had ever seen--but of that later.

Professor Wunsch went to the houses of his other pupils to give them
their lessons, but one morning he told Mrs. Kronborg that Thea had
talent, and that if she came to him he could teach her in his slippers,
and that would be better. Mrs. Kronborg was a strange woman. That word
“talent,” which no one else in Moonstone, not even Dr. Archie, would
have understood, she comprehended perfectly. To any other woman there,
it would have meant that a child must have her hair curled every day and
must play in public. Mrs. Kronborg knew it meant that Thea must practice
four hours a day. A child with talent must be kept at the piano, just as
a child with measles must be kept under the blankets. Mrs. Kronborg and
her three sisters had all studied piano, and all sang well, but none of
them had talent. Their father had played the oboe in an orchestra in
Sweden, before he came to America to better his fortunes. He had even
known Jenny Lind. A child with talent had to be kept at the piano; so
twice a week in summer and once a week in winter Thea went over the
gulch to the Kohlers', though the Ladies' Aid Society thought it was not
proper for their preacher's daughter to go “where there was so much
drinking.” Not that the Kohler sons ever so much as looked at a glass of
beer. They were ashamed of their old folks and got out into the world as
fast as possible; had their clothes made by a Denver tailor and their
necks shaved up under their hair and forgot the past. Old Fritz and
Wunsch, however, indulged in a friendly bottle pretty often. The two men
were like comrades; perhaps the bond between them was the glass wherein
lost hopes are found; perhaps it was common memories of another country;
perhaps it was the grapevine in the garden--knotty, fibrous shrub, full
of homesickness and sentiment, which the Germans have carried around the
world with them.

As Thea approached the house she peeped between the pink sprays of the
tamarisk hedge and saw the Professor and Mrs. Kohler in the garden,
spading and raking. The garden looked like a relief-map now, and gave no
indication of what it would be in August; such a jungle! Pole beans and
potatoes and corn and leeks and kale and red cabbage--there would even
be vegetables for which there is no American name. Mrs. Kohler was
always getting by mail packages of seeds from Freeport and from the old
country. Then the flowers! There were big sunflowers for the canary
bird, tiger lilies and phlox and zinnias and lady's-slippers and
portulaca and hollyhocks,--giant hollyhocks. Beside the fruit trees
there was a great umbrella-shaped catalpa, and a balm-of-Gilead, two
lindens, and even a ginka,--a rigid, pointed tree with leaves shaped
like butterflies, which shivered, but never bent to the wind.

This morning Thea saw to her delight that the two oleander trees, one
white and one red, had been brought up from their winter quarters in the
cellar. There is hardly a German family in the most arid parts of Utah,
New Mexico, Arizona, but has its oleander trees. However loutish the
American-born sons of the family may be, there was never one who refused
to give his muscle to the back-breaking task of getting those tubbed
trees down into the cellar in the fall and up into the sunlight in the
spring. They may strive to avert the day, but they grapple with the tub
at last.

When Thea entered the gate, her professor leaned his spade against the
white post that supported the turreted dove-house, and wiped his face
with his shirt-sleeve; someway he never managed to have a handkerchief
about him. Wunsch was short and stocky, with something rough and
bear-like about his shoulders. His face was a dark, bricky red, deeply
creased rather than wrinkled, and the skin was like loose leather over
his neck band--he wore a brass collar button but no collar. His hair was
cropped close; iron-gray bristles on a bullet-like head. His eyes were
always suffused and bloodshot. He had a coarse, scornful mouth, and
irregular, yellow teeth, much worn at the edges. His hands were square
and red, seldom clean, but always alive, impatient, even sympathetic.

“MORGEN,” he greeted his pupil in a businesslike way, put on a black
alpaca coat, and conducted her at once to the piano in Mrs. Kohler's
sitting-room. He twirled the stool to the proper height, pointed to it,
and sat down in a wooden chair beside Thea.

“The scale of B flat major,” he directed, and then fell into an attitude
of deep attention. Without a word his pupil set to work.

To Mrs. Kohler, in the garden, came the cheerful sound of effort, of
vigorous striving. Unconsciously she wielded her rake more lightly.
Occasionally she heard the teacher's voice. “Scale of E minor...WEITER,
WEITER!...IMMER I hear the thumb, like a lame foot. WEITER...WEITER,
once...SCHON! The chords, quick!”

The pupil did not open her mouth until they began the second movement of
the Clementi sonata, when she remonstrated in low tones about the way he
had marked the fingering of a passage.

“It makes no matter what you think,” replied her teacher coldly. “There
is only one right way. The thumb there. EIN, ZWEI, DREI, VIER,” etc.
Then for an hour there was no further interruption.

At the end of the lesson Thea turned on her stool and leaned her arm on
the keyboard. They usually had a little talk after the lesson.

Herr Wunsch grinned. “How soon is it you are free from school ? Then we
make ahead faster, eh ?”

“First week in June. Then will you give me the 'Invitation to the
Dance' ?”

He shrugged his shoulders. “It makes no matter. If you want him, you
play him out of lesson hours.”

“All right.” Thea fumbled in her pocket and brought out a crumpled slip
of paper. “What does this mean, please ? I guess it's Latin.”

Wunsch blinked at the line penciled on the paper. “Wherefrom you get
this ?” he asked gruffly.

“Out of a book Dr. Archie gave me to read. It's all English but that.
Did you ever see it before ?” she asked, watching his face.

“Yes. A long time ago,” he muttered, scowling. “Ovidius!” He took a stub
of lead pencil from his vest pocket, steadied his hand by a visible
effort, and under the words:

“LENTE CURRITE, LENTE CURRITE, NOCTIS EQUI,” he wrote in a clear,
elegant Gothic hand,--

“GO SLOWLY, GO SLOWLY, YE STEEDS OF THE NIGHT.”

He put the pencil back in his pocket and continued to stare at the
Latin. It recalled the poem, which he had read as a student, and thought
very fine. There were treasures of memory which no lodging-house keeper
could attach. One carried things about in one's head, long after one's
linen could be smuggled out in a tuning-bag. He handed the paper back
to Thea. “There is the English, quite elegant,” he said, rising.

Mrs. Kohler stuck her head in at the door, and Thea slid off the stool.
“Come in, Mrs. Kohler,” she called, “and show me the piece-picture.”

The old woman laughed, pulled off her big gardening gloves, and pushed
Thea to the lounge before the object of her delight. The
“piece-picture,” which hung on the wall and nearly covered one whole end
of the room, was the handiwork of Fritz Kohler. He had learned his trade
under an old-fashioned tailor in Magdeburg who required from each of his
apprentices a thesis: that is, before they left his shop, each
apprentice had to copy in cloth some well known German painting,
stitching bits of colored stuff together on a linen background; a kind
of mosaic. The pupil was allowed to select his subject, and Fritz Kohler
had chosen a popular painting of Napoleon's retreat from Moscow. The
gloomy Emperor and his staff were represented as crossing a stone
bridge, and behind them was the blazing city, the walls and fortresses
done in gray cloth with orange tongues of flame darting about the domes
and minarets. Napoleon rode his white horse; Murat, in Oriental dress, a
bay charger. Thea was never tired of examining this work, of hearing how
long it had taken Fritz to make it, how much it had been admired, and
what narrow escapes it had had from moths and fire. Silk, Mrs. Kohler
explained, would have been much easier to manage than woolen cloth, in
which it was often hard to get the right shades. The reins of the
horses, the wheels of the spurs, the brooding eyebrows of the Emperor,
Murat's fierce mustaches, the great shakos of the Guard, were all worked
out with the minutest fidelity. Thea's admiration for this picture had
endeared her to Mrs. Kohler. It was now many years since she used to
point out its wonders to her own little boys. As Mrs. Kohler did not go
to church, she never heard any singing, except the songs that floated
over from Mexican Town, and Thea often sang for her after the lesson was
over. This morning Wunsch pointed to the piano.

“On Sunday, when I go by the church, I hear you sing something.”

Thea obediently sat down on the stool again and began, “COME, YE
DISCONSOLATE.” Wunsch listened thoughtfully, his hands on his knees.
Such a beautiful child's voice! Old Mrs. Kohler's face relaxed in a
smile of happiness; she half closed her eyes. A big fly was darting in
and out of the window; the sunlight made a golden pool on the rag carpet
and bathed the faded cretonne pillows on the lounge, under the
piece-picture. “EARTH HAS NO SORROW THAT HEAVEN CANNOT HEAL,” the song
died away.

“That is a good thing to remember,” Wunsch shook himself. “You believe
that ?” looking quizzically at Thea.

She became confused and pecked nervously at a black key with her middle
finger. “I don't know. I guess so,” she murmured.

Her teacher rose abruptly. “Remember, for next time, thirds. You ought
to get up earlier.”

That night the air was so warm that Fritz and Herr Wunsch had their
after-supper pipe in the grape arbor, smoking in silence while the sound
of fiddles and guitars came across the ravine from Mexican Town. Long
after Fritz and his old Paulina had gone to bed, Wunsch sat motionless
in the arbor, looking up through the woolly vine leaves at the
glittering machinery of heaven.

“LENTE CURRITE, NOCTIS EQUI.”

That line awoke many memories. He was thinking of youth; of his own, so
long gone by, and of his pupil's, just beginning. He would even have
cherished hopes for her, except that he had become superstitious. He
believed that whatever he hoped for was destined not to be; that his
affection brought ill-fortune, especially to the young; that if he held
anything in his thoughts, he harmed it. He had taught in music schools
in St. Louis and Kansas City, where the shallowness and complacency of
the young misses had maddened him. He had encountered bad manners and
bad faith, had been the victim of sharpers of all kinds, was dogged by
bad luck. He had played in orchestras that were never paid and wandering
opera troupes which disbanded penniless. And there was always the old
enemy, more relentless than the others. It was long since he had wished
anything or desired anything beyond the necessities of the body. Now
that he was tempted to hope for another, he felt alarmed and shook his
head.

It was his pupil's power of application, her rugged will, that
interested him. He had lived for so long among people whose sole
ambition was to get something for nothing that he had learned not to
look for seriousness in anything. Now that he by chance encountered it,
it recalled standards, ambitions, a society long forgot. What was it she
reminded him of ? A yellow flower, full of sunlight, perhaps. No; a thin
glass full of sweet-smelling, sparkling Moselle wine. He seemed to see
such a glass before him in the arbor, to watch the bubbles rising and
breaking, like the silent discharge of energy in the nerves and brain,
the rapid florescence in young blood--Wunsch felt ashamed and dragged
his slippers along the path to the kitchen, his eyes on the ground.




V

The children in the primary grades were sometimes required to make
relief maps of Moonstone in sand. Had they used colored sands, as the
Navajo medicine men do in their sand mosaics, they could easily have
indicated the social classifications of Moonstone, since these conformed
to certain topographical boundaries, and every child understood them
perfectly.

The main business street ran, of course, through the center of the town.
To the west of this street lived all the people who were, as Tillie
Kronborg said, “in society.” Sylvester Street, the third parallel with
Main Street on the west, was the longest in town, and the best dwellings
were built along it. Far out at the north end, nearly a mile from the
court-house and its cottonwood grove, was Dr. Archie's house, its big
yard and garden surrounded by a white paling fence. The Methodist Church
was in the center of the town, facing the court-house square. The
Kronborgs lived half a mile south of the church, on the long street that
stretched out like an arm to the depot settlement. This was the first
street west of Main, and was built up only on one side. The preacher's
house faced the backs of the brick and frame store buildings and a draw
full of sunflowers and scraps of old iron. The sidewalk which ran in
front of the Kronborgs' house was the one continuous sidewalk to the
depot, and all the train men and roundhouse employees passed the front
gate every time they came uptown. Thea and Mrs. Kronborg had many
friends among the railroad men, who often paused to chat across the
fence, and of one of these we shall have more to say.

In the part of Moonstone that lay east of Main Street, toward the deep
ravine which, farther south, wound by Mexican Town, lived all the
humbler citizens, the people who voted but did not run for office. The
houses were little story-and-a-half cottages, with none of the fussy
architectural efforts that marked those on Sylvester Street. They
nestled modestly behind their cottonwoods and Virginia creeper; their
occupants had no social pretensions to keep up. There were no half-glass
front doors with doorbells, or formidable parlors behind closed
shutters. Here the old women washed in the back yard, and the men sat in
the front doorway and smoked their pipes. The people on Sylvester Street
scarcely knew that this part of the town existed. Thea liked to take
Thor and her express wagon and explore these quiet, shady streets, where
the people never tried to have lawns or to grow elms and pine trees, but
let the native timber have its way and spread in luxuriance. She had
many friends there, old women who gave her a yellow rose or a spray of
trumpet vine and appeased Thor with a cooky or a doughnut. They called
Thea “that preacher's girl,” but the demonstrative was misplaced, for
when they spoke of Mr. Kronborg they called him “the Methodist
preacher.”

Dr. Archie was very proud of his yard and garden, which he worked
himself. He was the only man in Moonstone who was successful at growing
rambler roses, and his strawberries were famous. One morning when Thea
was downtown on an errand, the doctor stopped her, took her hand and
went over her with a quizzical eye, as he nearly always did when they
met.

“You haven't been up to my place to get any strawberries yet, Thea.
They're at their best just now. Mrs. Archie doesn't know what to do with
them all. Come up this afternoon. Just tell Mrs. Archie I sent you.
Bring a big basket and pick till you are tired.”

When she got home Thea told her mother that she didn't want to go,
because she didn't like Mrs. Archie.

“She is certainly one queer woman,” Mrs. Kronborg assented, “but he's
asked you so often, I guess you'll have to go this time. She won't bite
you.”

After dinner Thea took a basket, put Thor in his baby buggy, and set out
for Dr. Archie's house at the other end of town. As soon as she came
within sight of the house, she slackened her pace. She approached it
very slowly, stopping often to pick dandelions and sand-peas for Thor to
crush up in his fist.

It was his wife's custom, as soon as Dr. Archie left the house in the
morning, to shut all the doors and windows to keep the dust out, and to
pull down the shades to keep the sun from fading the carpets. She
thought, too, that neighbors were less likely to drop in if the house
was closed up. She was one of those people who are stingy without motive
or reason, even when they can gain nothing by it. She must have known
that skimping the doctor in heat and food made him more extravagant than
he would have been had she made him comfortable. He never came home for
lunch, because she gave him such miserable scraps and shreds of food. No
matter how much milk he bought, he could never get thick cream for his
strawberries. Even when he watched his wife lift it from the milk in
smooth, ivory-colored blankets, she managed, by some sleight-of-hand, to
dilute it before it got to the breakfast table. The butcher's favorite
joke was about the kind of meat he sold Mrs. Archie. She felt no
interest in food herself, and she hated to prepare it. She liked nothing
better than to have Dr. Archie go to Denver for a few days--he often
went chiefly because he was hungry--and to be left alone to eat canned
salmon and to keep the house shut up from morning until night.

Mrs. Archie would not have a servant because, she said, “they ate too
much and broke too much”; she even said they knew too much. She used
what mind she had in devising shifts to minimize her housework. She used
to tell her neighbors that if there were no men, there would be no
housework. When Mrs. Archie was first married, she had been always in a
panic for fear she would have children. Now that her apprehensions on
that score had grown paler, she was almost as much afraid of having dust
in the house as she had once been of having children in it. If dust did
not get in, it did not have to be got out, she said. She would take any
amount of trouble to avoid trouble. Why, nobody knew. Certainly her
husband had never been able to make her out. Such little, mean natures
are among the darkest and most baffling of created things. There is no
law by which they can be explained. The ordinary incentives of pain and
pleasure do not account for their behavior. They live like insects,
absorbed in petty activities that seem to have nothing to do with any
genial aspect of human life.

Mrs. Archie, as Mrs. Kronborg said, “liked to gad.” She liked to have
her house clean, empty, dark, locked, and to be out of it--anywhere. A
church social, a prayer meeting, a ten-cent show; she seemed to have no
preference. When there was nowhere else to go, she used to sit for hours
in Mrs. Smiley's millinery and notion store, listening to the talk of
the women who came in, watching them while they tried on hats, blinking
at them from her corner with her sharp, restless little eyes. She never
talked much herself, but she knew all the gossip of the town and she had
a sharp ear for racy anecdotes--“traveling men's stories,” they used to
be called in Moonstone. Her clicking laugh sounded like a typewriting
machine in action, and, for very pointed stories, she had a little
screech.

Mrs. Archie had been Mrs. Archie for only six years, and when she was
Belle White she was one of the “pretty” girls in Lansing, Michigan. She
had then a train of suitors. She could truly remind Archie that “the
boys hung around her.” They did. They thought her very spirited and were
always saying, “Oh, that Belle White, she's a case!” She used to play
heavy practical jokes which the young men thought very clever. Archie
was considered the most promising young man in “the young crowd,” so
Belle selected him. She let him see, made him fully aware, that she had
selected him, and Archie was the sort of boy who could not withstand
such enlightenment. Belle's family were sorry for him. On his wedding
day her sisters looked at the big, handsome boy--he was twenty-four--as
he walked down the aisle with his bride, and then they looked at each
other. His besotted confidence, his sober, radiant face, his gentle,
protecting arm, made them uncomfortable. Well, they were glad that he
was going West at once, to fulfill his doom where they would not be
onlookers. Anyhow, they consoled themselves, they had got Belle off
their hands.

More than that, Belle seemed to have got herself off her hands. Her
reputed prettiness must have been entirely the result of determination,
of a fierce little ambition. Once she had married, fastened herself on
some one, come to port,--it vanished like the ornamental plumage which
drops away from some birds after the mating season. The one aggressive
action of her life was over. She began to shrink in face and stature. Of
her harum-scarum spirit there was nothing left but the little screech.
Within a few years she looked as small and mean as she was.

Thor's chariot crept along. Thea approached the house unwillingly. She
didn't care about the strawberries, anyhow. She had come only because
she did not want to hurt Dr. Archie's feelings. She not only disliked
Mrs. Archie, she was a little afraid of her. While Thea was getting the
heavy baby-buggy through the iron gate she heard some one call, “Wait a
minute!” and Mrs. Archie came running around the house from the back
door, her apron over her head. She came to help with the buggy, because
she was afraid the wheels might scratch the paint off the gateposts. She
was a skinny little woman with a great pile of frizzy light hair on a
small head.

“Dr. Archie told me to come up and pick some strawberries,” Thea
muttered, wishing she had stayed at home.

Mrs. Archie led the way to the back door, squinting and shading her eyes
with her hand. “Wait a minute,” she said again, when Thea explained why
she had come.

She went into her kitchen and Thea sat down on the porch step. When Mrs.
Archie reappeared she carried in her hand a little wooden butter-basket
trimmed with fringed tissue paper, which she must have brought home from
some church supper. “You'll have to have something to put them in,” she
said, ignoring the yawning willow basket which stood empty on Thor's
feet. “You can have this, and you needn't mind about returning it. You
know about not trampling the vines, don't you ?”

Mrs. Archie went back into the house and Thea leaned over in the sand
and picked a few strawberries. As soon as she was sure that she was not
going to cry, she tossed the little basket into the big one and ran
Thor's buggy along the gravel walk and out of the gate as fast as she
could push it. She was angry, and she was ashamed for Dr. Archie. She
could not help thinking how uncomfortable he would be if he ever found
out about it. Little things like that were the ones that cut him most.
She slunk home by the back way, and again almost cried when she told her
mother about it.

Mrs. Kronborg was frying doughnuts for her husband's supper. She laughed
as she dropped a new lot into the hot grease. “It's wonderful, the way
some people are made,” she declared. “But I wouldn't let that upset me
if I was you. Think what it would be to live with it all the time. You
look in the black pocketbook inside my handbag and take a dime and go
downtown and get an ice-cream soda. That'll make you feel better. Thor
can have a little of the ice-cream if you feed it to him with a spoon.
He likes it, don't you, son ?” She stooped to wipe his chin. Thor was
only six months old and inarticulate, but it was quite true that he
liked ice-cream.




VI

Seen from a balloon, Moonstone would have looked like a Noah's ark town
set out in the sand and lightly shaded by gray-green tamarisks and
cottonwoods. A few people were trying to make soft maples grow in their
turfed lawns, but the fashion of planting incongruous trees from the
North Atlantic States had not become general then, and the frail,
brightly painted desert town was shaded by the light-reflecting,
wind-loving trees of the desert, whose roots are always seeking water
and whose leaves are always talking about it, making the sound of rain.
The long porous roots of the cottonwood are irrepressible. They break
into the wells as rats do into granaries, and thieve the water.

The long street which connected Moonstone with the depot settlement
traversed in its course a considerable stretch of rough open country,
staked out in lots but not built up at all, a weedy hiatus between the
town and the railroad. When you set out along this street to go to the
station, you noticed that the houses became smaller and farther apart,
until they ceased altogether, and the board sidewalk continued its
uneven course through sunflower patches, until you reached the solitary,
new brick Catholic Church. The church stood there because the land was
given to the parish by the man who owned the adjoining waste lots, in
the hope of making them more salable--“Farrier's Addition,” this patch
of prairie was called in the clerk's office. An eighth of a mile beyond
the church was a washout, a deep sand-gully, where the board sidewalk
became a bridge for perhaps fifty feet. Just beyond the gully was old
Uncle Billy Beemer's grove,--twelve town lots set out in fine,
well-grown cottonwood trees, delightful to look upon, or to listen to,
as they swayed and rippled in the wind. Uncle Billy had been one of the
most worthless old drunkards who ever sat on a store box and told filthy
stories. One night he played hide-and-seek with a switch engine and got
his sodden brains knocked out. But his grove, the one creditable thing
he had ever done in his life, rustled on. Beyond this grove the houses
of the depot settlement began, and the naked board walk, that had run in
out of the sunflowers, again became a link between human dwellings.

One afternoon, late in the summer, Dr. Howard Archie was fighting his
way back to town along this walk through a blinding sandstorm, a silk
handkerchief tied over his mouth. He had been to see a sick woman down
in the depot settlement, and he was walking because his ponies had been
out for a hard drive that morning.

As he passed the Catholic Church he came upon Thea and Thor. Thea was
sitting in a child's express wagon, her feet out behind, kicking the
wagon along and steering by the tongue. Thor was on her lap and she held
him with one arm. He had grown to be a big cub of a baby, with a
constitutional grievance, and he had to be continually amused. Thea took
him philosophically, and tugged and pulled him about, getting as much
fun as she could under her encumbrance. Her hair was blowing about her
face, and her eyes were squinting so intently at the uneven board
sidewalk in front of her that she did not see the doctor until he spoke
to her.

“Look out, Thea. You'll steer that youngster into the ditch.”

The wagon stopped. Thea released the tongue, wiped her hot, sandy face,
and pushed back her hair. “Oh, no, I won't! I never ran off but once,
and then he didn't get anything but a bump. He likes this better than a
baby buggy, and so do I.”

“Are you going to kick that cart all the way home ?”

“Of course. We take long trips; wherever there is a sidewalk. It's no
good on the road.”

“Looks to me like working pretty hard for your fun. Are you going to be
busy to-night ? Want to make a call with me ? Spanish Johnny's come home
again, all used up. His wife sent me word this morning, and I said I'd
go over to see him to-night. He's an old chum of yours, isn't he ?”

“Oh, I'm glad. She's been crying her eyes out. When did he come ?”

“Last night, on Number Six. Paid his fare, they tell me. Too sick to
beat it. There'll come a time when that boy won't get back, I'm afraid.
Come around to my office about eight o'clock,--and you needn't bring
that!”

Thor seemed to understand that he had been insulted, for he scowled and
began to kick the side of the wagon, shouting, “Go-go, go-go!” Thea
leaned forward and grabbed the wagon tongue. Dr. Archie stepped in front
of her and blocked the way. “Why don't you make him wait ? What do you
let him boss you like that for ?”

“If he gets mad he throws himself, and then I can't do anything with
him. When he's mad he's lots stronger than me, aren't you, Thor ?” Thea
spoke with pride, and the idol was appeased. He grunted approvingly as
his sister began to kick rapidly behind her, and the wagon rattled off
and soon disappeared in the flying currents of sand.

That evening Dr. Archie was seated in his office, his desk chair tilted
back, reading by the light of a hot coal-oil lamp. All the windows were
open, but the night was breathless after the sandstorm, and his hair was
moist where it hung over his forehead. He was deeply engrossed in his
book and sometimes smiled thoughtfully as he read. When Thea Kronborg
entered quietly and slipped into a seat, he nodded, finished his
paragraph, inserted a bookmark, and rose to put the book back into the
case. It was one out of the long row of uniform volumes on the top
shelf.

“Nearly every time I come in, when you're alone, you're reading one of
those books,” Thea remarked thoughtfully. “They must be very nice.”

The doctor dropped back into his swivel chair, the mottled volume still
in his hand. “They aren't exactly books, Thea,” he said seriously.
“They're a city.”

“A history, you mean ?”

“Yes, and no. They're a history of a live city, not a dead one. A
Frenchman undertook to write about a whole cityful of people, all the
kinds he knew. And he got them nearly all in, I guess. Yes, it's very
interesting. You'll like to read it some day, when you're grown up.”

Thea leaned forward and made out the title on the back, “A Distinguished
Provincial in Paris.”

“It doesn't sound very interesting.”

“Perhaps not, but it is.” The doctor scrutinized her broad face, low
enough to be in the direct light from under the green lamp shade. “Yes,”
 he went on with some satisfaction, “I think you'll like them some day.
You're always curious about people, and I expect this man knew more
about people than anybody that ever lived.”

“City people or country people ?”

“Both. People are pretty much the same everywhere.”

“Oh, no, they're not. The people who go through in the dining-car aren't
like us.”

“What makes you think they aren't, my girl ? Their clothes ?”

Thea shook her head. “No, it's something else. I don't know.” Her eyes
shifted under the doctor's searching gaze and she glanced up at the row
of books. “How soon will I be old enough to read them ?”

“Soon enough, soon enough, little girl.” The doctor patted her hand and
looked at her index finger. “The nail's coming all right, isn't it ? But
I think that man makes you practice too much. You have it on your mind
all the time.” He had noticed that when she talked to him she was always
opening and shutting her hands. “It makes you nervous.”

“No, he don't,” Thea replied stubbornly, watching Dr. Archie return the
book to its niche.

He took up a black leather case, put on his hat, and they went down the
dark stairs into the street. The summer moon hung full in the sky. For
the time being, it was the great fact in the world. Beyond the edge of
the town the plain was so white that every clump of sage stood out
distinct from the sand, and the dunes looked like a shining lake. The
doctor took off his straw hat and carried it in his hand as they walked
toward Mexican Town, across the sand.

North of Pueblo, Mexican settlements were rare in Colorado then. This
one had come about accidentally. Spanish Johnny was the first Mexican
who came to Moonstone. He was a painter and decorator, and had been
working in Trinidad, when Ray Kennedy told him there was a “boom” on in
Moonstone, and a good many new buildings were going up. A year after
Johnny settled in Moonstone, his cousin, Famos Serrenos, came to work in
the brickyard; then Serrenos' cousins came to help him. During the
strike, the master mechanic put a gang of Mexicans to work in the
roundhouse. The Mexicans had arrived so quietly, with their blankets and
musical instruments, that before Moonstone was awake to the fact, there
was a Mexican quarter; a dozen families or more.

As Thea and the doctor approached the 'dobe houses, they heard a guitar,
and a rich barytone voice--that of Famos Serrenos--singing “La
Golandrina.” All the Mexican houses had neat little yards, with tamarisk
hedges and flowers, and walks bordered with shells or whitewashed
stones. Johnny's house was dark. His wife, Mrs. Tellamantez, was sitting
on the doorstep, combing her long, blue-black hair. (Mexican women are
like the Spartans; when they are in trouble, in love, under stress of
any kind, they comb and comb their hair.) She rose without embarrassment
or apology, comb in hand, and greeted the doctor.

“Good-evening; will you go in ?” she asked in a low, musical voice. “He
is in the back room. I will make a light.” She followed them indoors,
lit a candle and handed it to the doctor, pointing toward the bedroom.
Then she went back and sat down on her doorstep.

Dr. Archie and Thea went into the bedroom, which was dark and quiet.
There was a bed in the corner, and a man was lying on the clean sheets.
On the table beside him was a glass pitcher, half-full of water. Spanish
Johnny looked younger than his wife, and when he was in health he was
very handsome: slender, gold-colored, with wavy black hair, a round,
smooth throat, white teeth, and burning black eyes. His profile was
strong and severe, like an Indian's. What was termed his “wildness”
 showed itself only in his feverish eyes and in the color that burned on
his tawny cheeks. That night he was a coppery green, and his eyes were
like black holes. He opened them when the doctor held the candle before
his face.

“MI TESTA!” he muttered, “MI TESTA,” doctor. “LA FIEBRE!” Seeing the
doctor's companion at the foot of the bed, he attempted a smile.
“MUCHACHA!” he exclaimed deprecatingly.

Dr. Archie stuck a thermometer into his mouth. “Now, Thea, you can run
outside and wait for me.”

Thea slipped noiselessly through the dark house and joined Mrs.
Tellamantez. The somber Mexican woman did not seem inclined to talk, but
her nod was friendly. Thea sat down on the warm sand, her back to the
moon, facing Mrs. Tellamantez on her doorstep, and began to count the
moon flowers on the vine that ran over the house. Mrs. Tellamantez was
always considered a very homely woman. Her face was of a strongly marked
type not sympathetic to Americans. Such long, oval faces, with a full
chin, a large, mobile mouth, a high nose, are not uncommon in Spain.
Mrs. Tellamantez could not write her name, and could read but little.
Her strong nature lived upon itself. She was chiefly known in Moonstone
for her forbearance with her incorrigible husband.

Nobody knew exactly what was the matter with Johnny, and everybody liked
him. His popularity would have been unusual for a white man, for a
Mexican it was unprecedented. His talents were his undoing. He had a
high, uncertain tenor voice, and he played the mandolin with exceptional
skill. Periodically he went crazy. There was no other way to explain his
behavior. He was a clever workman, and, when he worked, as regular and
faithful as a burro. Then some night he would fall in with a crowd at
the saloon and begin to sing. He would go on until he had no voice left,
until he wheezed and rasped. Then he would play his mandolin furiously,
and drink until his eyes sank back into his head. At last, when he was
put out of the saloon at closing time, and could get nobody to listen to
him, he would run away--along the railroad track, straight across the
desert. He always managed to get aboard a freight somewhere. Once beyond
Denver, he played his way southward from saloon to saloon until he got
across the border. He never wrote to his wife; but she would soon begin
to get newspapers from La Junta, Albuquerque, Chihuahua, with marked
paragraphs announcing that Juan Tellamantez and his wonderful mandolin
could be heard at the Jack Rabbit Grill, or the Pearl of Cadiz Saloon.
Mrs. Tellamantez waited and wept and combed her hair. When he was
completely wrung out and burned up,--all but destroyed,--her Juan always
came back to her to be taken care of,--once with an ugly knife wound in
the neck, once with a finger missing from his right hand,--but he played
just as well with three fingers as he had with four.

Public sentiment was lenient toward Johnny, but everybody was disgusted
with Mrs. Tellamantez for putting up with him. She ought to discipline
him, people said; she ought to leave him; she had no self-respect. In
short, Mrs. Tellamantez got all the blame. Even Thea thought she was
much too humble. To-night, as she sat with her back to the moon, looking
at the moon flowers and Mrs. Tellamantez's somber face, she was thinking
that there is nothing so sad in the world as that kind of patience and
resignation. It was much worse than Johnny's craziness. She even
wondered whether it did not help to make Johnny crazy. People had no
right to be so passive and resigned. She would like to roll over and
over in the sand and screech at Mrs. Tellamantez. She was glad when the
doctor came out.

The Mexican woman rose and stood respectful and expectant. The doctor
held his hat in his hand and looked kindly at her.

“Same old thing, Mrs. Tellamantez. He's no worse than he's been before.
I've left some medicine. Don't give him anything but toast water until I
see him again. You're a good nurse; you'll get him out.” Dr. Archie
smiled encouragingly. He glanced about the little garden and wrinkled
his brows. “I can't see what makes him behave so. He's killing himself,
and he's not a rowdy sort of fellow. Can't you tie him up someway ? Can't
you tell when these fits are coming on ?”

Mrs. Tellamantez put her hand to her forehead. “The saloon, doctor, the
excitement; that is what makes him. People listen to him, and it excites
him.”

The doctor shook his head. “Maybe. He's too much for my calculations. I
don't see what he gets out of it.”

“He is always fooled,”--the Mexican woman spoke rapidly and tremulously,
her long under lip quivering.

“He is good at heart, but he has no head. He fools himself. You do not
understand in this country, you are progressive. But he has no judgment,
and he is fooled.” She stooped quickly, took up one of the white
conch-shells that bordered the walk, and, with an apologetic inclination
of her head, held it to Dr. Archie's ear. “Listen, doctor. You hear
something in there ? You hear the sea; and yet the sea is very far from
here. You have judgment, and you know that. But he is fooled. To him, it
is the sea itself. A little thing is big to him.” She bent and placed
the shell in the white row, with its fellows. Thea took it up softly and
pressed it to her own ear. The sound in it startled her; it was like
something calling one. So that was why Johnny ran away. There was
something awe-inspiring about Mrs. Tellamantez and her shell.

Thea caught Dr. Archie's hand and squeezed it hard as she skipped along
beside him back toward Moonstone. She went home, and the doctor went
back to his lamp and his book. He never left his office until after
midnight. If he did not play whist or pool in the evening, he read. It
had become a habit with him to lose himself.




VII

Thea's twelfth birthday had passed a few weeks before her memorable call
upon Mrs. Tellamantez. There was a worthy man in Moonstone who was
already planning to marry Thea as soon as she should be old enough. His
name was Ray Kennedy, his age was thirty, and he was conductor on a
freight train, his run being from Moonstone to Denver. Ray was a big
fellow, with a square, open American face, a rock chin, and features
that one would never happen to remember. He was an aggressive idealist,
a freethinker, and, like most railroad men, deeply sentimental. Thea
liked him for reasons that had to do with the adventurous life he had
led in Mexico and the Southwest, rather than for anything very personal.
She liked him, too, because he was the only one of her friends who ever
took her to the sand hills. The sand hills were a constant
tantalization; she loved them better than anything near Moonstone, and
yet she could so seldom get to them. The first dunes were accessible
enough; they were only a few miles beyond the Kohlers', and she could
run out there any day when she could do her practicing in the morning
and get Thor off her hands for an afternoon. But the real hills--the
Turquoise Hills, the Mexicans called them--were ten good miles away, and
one reached them by a heavy, sandy road. Dr. Archie sometimes took Thea
on his long drives, but as nobody lived in the sand hills, he never had
calls to make in that direction. Ray Kennedy was her only hope of
getting there.

This summer Thea had not been to the hills once, though Ray had planned
several Sunday expeditions. Once Thor was sick, and once the organist in
her father's church was away and Thea had to play the organ for the
three Sunday services. But on the first Sunday in September, Ray drove
up to the Kronborgs' front gate at nine o'clock in the morning and the
party actually set off. Gunner and Axel went with Thea, and Ray had
asked Spanish Johnny to come and to bring Mrs. Tellamantez and his
mandolin. Ray was artlessly fond of music, especially of Mexican music.
He and Mrs. Tellamantez had got up the lunch between them, and they were
to make coffee in the desert.

When they left Mexican Town, Thea was on the front seat with Ray and
Johnny, and Gunner and Axel sat behind with Mrs. Tellamantez. They
objected to this, of course, but there were some things about which Thea
would have her own way. “As stubborn as a Finn,” Mrs. Kronborg sometimes
said of her, quoting an old Swedish saying. When they passed the
Kohlers', old Fritz and Wunsch were cutting grapes at the arbor. Thea
gave them a businesslike nod. Wunsch came to the gate and looked after
them. He divined Ray Kennedy's hopes, and he distrusted every expedition
that led away from the piano. Unconsciously he made Thea pay for
frivolousness of this sort.

As Ray Kennedy's party followed the faint road across the sagebrush,
they heard behind them the sound of church bells, which gave them a
sense of escape and boundless freedom. Every rabbit that shot across the
path, every sage hen that flew up by the trail, was like a runaway
thought, a message that one sent into the desert. As they went farther,
the illusion of the mirage became more instead of less convincing; a
shallow silver lake that spread for many miles, a little misty in the
sunlight. Here and there one saw reflected the image of a heifer, turned
loose to live upon the sparse sand-grass. They were magnified to a
preposterous height and looked like mammoths, prehistoric beasts
standing solitary in the waters that for many thousands of years
actually washed over that desert;--the mirage itself may be the ghost
of that long-vanished sea. Beyond the phantom lake lay the line of
many-colored hills; rich, sun-baked yellow, glowing turquoise, lavender,
purple; all the open, pastel colors of the desert.

After the first five miles the road grew heavier. The horses had to slow
down to a walk and the wheels sank deep into the sand, which now lay in
long ridges, like waves, where the last high wind had drifted it. Two
hours brought the party to Pedro's Cup, named for a Mexican desperado
who had once held the sheriff at bay there. The Cup was a great
amphitheater, cut out in the hills, its floor smooth and packed hard,
dotted with sagebrush and greasewood.

On either side of the Cup the yellow hills ran north and south, with
winding ravines between them, full of soft sand which drained down from
the crumbling banks. On the surface of this fluid sand, one could find
bits of brilliant stone, crystals and agates and onyx, and petrified
wood as red as blood. Dried toads and lizards were to be found there,
too. Birds, decomposing more rapidly, left only feathered skeletons.

After a little reconnoitering, Mrs. Tellamantez declared that it was
time for lunch, and Ray took his hatchet and began to cut greasewood,
which burns fiercely in its green state. The little boys dragged the
bushes to the spot that Mrs. Tellamantez had chosen for her fire.
Mexican women like to cook out of doors.

After lunch Thea sent Gunner and Axel to hunt for agates. “If you see a
rattlesnake, run. Don't try to kill it,” she enjoined.

Gunner hesitated. “If Ray would let me take the hatchet, I could kill
one all right.”

Mrs. Tellamantez smiled and said something to Johnny in Spanish.

“Yes,” her husband replied, translating, “they say in Mexico, kill a
snake but never hurt his feelings. Down in the hot country, MUCHACHA,”
 turning to Thea, “people keep a pet snake in the house to kill rats and
mice. They call him the house snake. They keep a little mat for him by
the fire, and at night he curl up there and sit with the family, just as
friendly!”

Gunner sniffed with disgust. “Well, I think that's a dirty Mexican way
to keep house; so there!”

Johnny shrugged his shoulders. “Perhaps,” he muttered. A Mexican learns
to dive below insults or soar above them, after he crosses the border.

By this time the south wall of the amphitheater cast a narrow shelf of
shadow, and the party withdrew to this refuge. Ray and Johnny began to
talk about the Grand Canyon and Death Valley, two places much shrouded
in mystery in those days, and Thea listened intently. Mrs. Tellamantez
took out her drawn-work and pinned it to her knee. Ray could talk well
about the large part of the continent over which he had been knocked
about, and Johnny was appreciative.

“You been all over, pretty near. Like a Spanish boy,” he commented
respectfully.

Ray, who had taken off his coat, whetted his pocketknife thoughtfully on
the sole of his shoe. “I began to browse around early. I had a mind to
see something of this world, and I ran away from home before I was
twelve. Rustled for myself ever since.”

“Ran away ?” Johnny looked hopeful. “What for ?”

“Couldn't make it go with my old man, and didn't take to farming. There
were plenty of boys at home. I wasn't missed.”

Thea wriggled down in the hot sand and rested her chin on her arm. “Tell
Johnny about the melons, Ray, please do!”

Ray's solid, sunburned cheeks grew a shade redder, and he looked
reproachfully at Thea. “You're stuck on that story, kid. You like to get
the laugh on me, don't you ? That was the finishing split I had with my
old man, John. He had a claim along the creek, not far from Denver, and
raised a little garden stuff for market. One day he had a load of melons
and he decided to take 'em to town and sell 'em along the street, and he
made me go along and drive for him. Denver wasn't the queen city it is
now, by any means, but it seemed a terrible big place to me; and when we
got there, if he didn't make me drive right up Capitol Hill! Pap got out
and stopped at folkses houses to ask if they didn't want to buy any
melons, and I was to drive along slow. The farther I went the madder I
got, but I was trying to look unconscious, when the end-gate came loose
and one of the melons fell out and squashed. Just then a swell girl, all
dressed up, comes out of one of the big houses and calls out, 'Hello,
boy, you're losing your melons!' Some dudes on the other side of the
street took their hats off to her and began to laugh. I couldn't stand
it any longer. I grabbed the whip and lit into that team, and they tore
up the hill like jack-rabbits, them damned melons bouncing out the back
every jump, the old man cussin' an' yellin' behind and everybody
laughin'. I never looked behind, but the whole of Capitol Hill must have
been a mess with them squashed melons. I didn't stop the team till I got
out of sight of town. Then I pulled up an' left 'em with a rancher I was
acquainted with, and I never went home to get the lickin' that was
waitin' for me. I expect it's waitin' for me yet.”

Thea rolled over in the sand. “Oh, I wish I could have seen those melons
fly, Ray! I'll never see anything as funny as that. Now, tell Johnny
about your first job.”

Ray had a collection of good stories. He was observant, truthful, and
kindly--perhaps the chief requisites in a good story-teller.
Occasionally he used newspaper phrases, conscientiously learned in his
efforts at self-instruction, but when he talked naturally he was always
worth listening to. Never having had any schooling to speak of, he had,
almost from the time he first ran away, tried to make good his loss. As
a sheep-herder he had worried an old grammar to tatters, and read
instructive books with the help of a pocket dictionary. By the light of
many camp-fires he had pondered upon Prescott's histories, and the works
of Washington Irving, which he bought at a high price from a book-agent.
Mathematics and physics were easy for him, but general culture came
hard, and he was determined to get it. Ray was a freethinker, and
inconsistently believed himself damned for being one. When he was
braking, down on the Santa Fe, at the end of his run he used to climb
into the upper bunk of the caboose, while a noisy gang played poker
about the stove below him, and by the roof-lamp read Robert Ingersoll's
speeches and “The Age of Reason.”

Ray was a loyal-hearted fellow, and it had cost him a great deal to give
up his God. He was one of the stepchildren of Fortune, and he had very
little to show for all his hard work; the other fellow always got the
best of it. He had come in too late, or too early, on several schemes
that had made money. He brought with him from all his wanderings a good
deal of information (more or less correct in itself, but unrelated, and
therefore misleading), a high standard of personal honor, a sentimental
veneration for all women, bad as well as good, and a bitter hatred of
Englishmen. Thea often thought that the nicest thing about Ray was his
love for Mexico and the Mexicans, who had been kind to him when he
drifted, a homeless boy, over the border. In Mexico, Ray was Senor
Ken-ay-dy, and when he answered to that name he was somehow a different
fellow. He spoke Spanish fluently, and the sunny warmth of that tongue
kept him from being quite as hard as his chin, or as narrow as his
popular science.

While Ray was smoking his cigar, he and Johnny fell to talking about the
great fortunes that had been made in the Southwest, and about fellows
they knew who had “struck it rich.”

“I guess you been in on some big deals down there ?” Johnny asked
trustfully.

Ray smiled and shook his head. “I've been out on some, John. I've never
been exactly in on any. So far, I've either held on too long or let go
too soon. But mine's coming to me, all right.” Ray looked reflective. He
leaned back in the shadow and dug out a rest for his elbow in the sand.
“The narrowest escape I ever had, was in the Bridal Chamber. If I hadn't
let go there, it would have made me rich. That was a close call.”

Johnny looked delighted. “You don' say! She was silver mine, I guess ?”

“I guess she was! Down at Lake Valley. I put up a few hundred for the
prospector, and he gave me a bunch of stock. Before we'd got anything
out of it, my brother-in-law died of the fever in Cuba. My sister was
beside herself to get his body back to Colorado to bury him. Seemed
foolish to me, but she's the only sister I got. It's expensive for dead
folks to travel, and I had to sell my stock in the mine to raise the
money to get Elmer on the move. Two months afterward, the boys struck
that big pocket in the rock, full of virgin silver. They named her the
Bridal Chamber. It wasn't ore, you remember. It was pure, soft metal you
could have melted right down into dollars. The boys cut it out with
chisels. If old Elmer hadn't played that trick on me, I'd have been in
for about fifty thousand. That was a close call, Spanish.”

“I recollec'. When the pocket gone, the town go bust.”

“You bet. Higher'n a kite. There was no vein, just a pocket in the rock
that had sometime or another got filled up with molten silver. You'd
think there would be more somewhere about, but NADA. There's fools
digging holes in that mountain yet.”

When Ray had finished his cigar, Johnny took his mandolin and began
Kennedy's favorite, “Ultimo Amor.” It was now three o'clock in the
afternoon, the hottest hour in the day. The narrow shelf of shadow had
widened until the floor of the amphitheater was marked off in two
halves, one glittering yellow, and one purple. The little boys had come
back and were making a robbers' cave to enact the bold deeds of Pedro
the bandit. Johnny, stretched gracefully on the sand, passed from
“Ultimo Amor” to “Fluvia de Oro,” and then to “Noches de Algeria,”
 playing languidly.

Every one was busy with his own thoughts. Mrs. Tellamantez was thinking
of the square in the little town in which she was born; of the white
church steps, with people genuflecting as they passed, and the
round-topped acacia trees, and the band playing in the plaza. Ray
Kennedy was thinking of the future, dreaming the large Western dream of
easy money, of a fortune kicked up somewhere in the hills,--an oil well,
a gold mine, a ledge of copper. He always told himself, when he accepted
a cigar from a newly married railroad man, that he knew enough not to
marry until he had found his ideal, and could keep her like a queen. He
believed that in the yellow head over there in the sand he had found his
ideal, and that by the time she was old enough to marry, he would be
able to keep her like a queen. He would kick it up from somewhere, when
he got loose from the railroad.

Thea, stirred by tales of adventure, of the Grand Canyon and Death
Valley, was recalling a great adventure of her own. Early in the summer
her father had been invited to conduct a reunion of old frontiersmen, up
in Wyoming, near Laramie, and he took Thea along with him to play the
organ and sing patriotic songs. There they stayed at the house of an old
ranchman who told them about a ridge up in the hills called Laramie
Plain, where the wagon-trails of the Forty-niners and the Mormons were
still visible. The old man even volunteered to take Mr. Kronborg up into
the hills to see this place, though it was a very long drive to make in
one day. Thea had begged frantically to go along, and the old rancher,
flattered by her rapt attention to his stories, had interceded for her.

They set out from Laramie before daylight, behind a strong team of
mules. All the way there was much talk of the Forty-niners. The old
rancher had been a teamster in a freight train that used to crawl back
and forth across the plains between Omaha and Cherry Creek, as Denver
was then called, and he had met many a wagon train bound for California.
He told of Indians and buffalo, thirst and slaughter, wanderings in
snowstorms, and lonely graves in the desert.

The road they followed was a wild and beautiful one. It led up and up,
by granite rocks and stunted pines, around deep ravines and echoing
gorges. The top of the ridge, when they reached it, was a great flat
plain, strewn with white boulders, with the wind howling over it. There
was not one trail, as Thea had expected; there were a score; deep
furrows, cut in the earth by heavy wagon wheels, and now grown over with
dry, whitish grass. The furrows ran side by side; when one trail had
been worn too deep, the next party had abandoned it and made a new trail
to the right or left. They were, indeed, only old wagon ruts, running
east and west, and grown over with grass. But as Thea ran about among
the white stones, her skirts blowing this way and that, the wind brought
to her eyes tears that might have come anyway. The old rancher picked up
an iron ox-shoe from one of the furrows and gave it to her for a
keepsake. To the west one could see range after range of blue mountains,
and at last the snowy range, with its white, windy peaks, the clouds
caught here and there on their spurs. Again and again Thea had to hide
her face from the cold for a moment. The wind never slept on this plain,
the old man said. Every little while eagles flew over.

Coming up from Laramie, the old man had told them that he was in
Brownsville, Nebraska, when the first telegraph wires were put across
the Missouri River, and that the first message that ever crossed the
river was “Westward the course of Empire takes its way.” He had been in
the room when the instrument began to click, and all the men there had,
without thinking what they were doing, taken off their hats, waiting
bareheaded to hear the message translated. Thea remembered that message
when she sighted down the wagon tracks toward the blue mountains. She
told herself she would never, never forget it. The spirit of human
courage seemed to live up there with the eagles. For long after, when
she was moved by a Fourth-of-July oration, or a band, or a circus
parade, she was apt to remember that windy ridge.

To-day she went to sleep while she was thinking about it. When Ray
wakened her, the horses were hitched to the wagon and Gunner and Axel
were begging for a place on the front seat. The air had cooled, the sun
was setting, and the desert was on fire. Thea contentedly took the back
seat with Mrs. Tellamantez. As they drove homeward the stars began to
come out, pale yellow in a yellow sky, and Ray and Johnny began to sing
one of those railroad ditties that are usually born on the Southern
Pacific and run the length of the Santa Fe and the “Q” system before
they die to give place to a new one. This was a song about a Greaser
dance, the refrain being something like this:--

     “Pedro, Pedro, swing high, swing low,
     And it's allamand left again;
     For there's boys that's bold and there's some that's cold,
     But the gold boys come from Spain,
     Oh, the gold boys come from Spain!”




VIII

Winter was long in coming that year. Throughout October the days were
bathed in sunlight and the air was clear as crystal. The town kept its
cheerful summer aspect, the desert glistened with light, the sand hills
every day went through magical changes of color. The scarlet sage
bloomed late in the front yards, the cottonwood leaves were bright gold
long before they fell, and it was not until November that the green on
the tamarisks began to cloud and fade. There was a flurry of snow about
Thanksgiving, and then December came on warm and clear.

Thea had three music pupils now, little girls whose mothers declared
that Professor Wunsch was “much too severe.” They took their lessons on
Saturday, and this, of course, cut down her time for play. She did not
really mind this because she was allowed to use the money--her pupils
paid her twenty-five cents a lesson--to fit up a little room for herself
upstairs in the half-story. It was the end room of the wing, and was not
plastered, but was snugly lined with soft pine. The ceiling was so low
that a grown person could reach it with the palm of the hand, and it
sloped down on either side. There was only one window, but it was a
double one and went to the floor. In October, while the days were still
warm, Thea and Tillie papered the room, walls and ceiling in the same
paper, small red and brown roses on a yellowish ground. Thea bought a
brown cotton carpet, and her big brother, Gus, put it down for her one
Sunday. She made white cheesecloth curtains and hung them on a tape. Her
mother gave her an old walnut dresser with a broken mirror, and she had
her own dumpy walnut single bed, and a blue washbowl and pitcher which
she had drawn at a church fair lottery. At the head of her bed she had a
tall round wooden hat-crate, from the clothing store. This, standing on
end and draped with cretonne, made a fairly steady table for her
lantern. She was not allowed to take a lamp upstairs, so Ray Kennedy
gave her a railroad lantern by which she could read at night.

In winter this loft room of Thea's was bitterly cold, but against her
mother's advice--and Tillie's--she always left her window open a little
way. Mrs. Kronborg declared that she “had no patience with American
physiology,” though the lessons about the injurious effects of alcohol
and tobacco were well enough for the boys. Thea asked Dr. Archie about
the window, and he told her that a girl who sang must always have plenty
of fresh air, or her voice would get husky, and that the cold would
harden her throat. The important thing, he said, was to keep your feet
warm. On very cold nights Thea always put a brick in the oven after
supper, and when she went upstairs she wrapped it in an old flannel
petticoat and put it in her bed. The boys, who would never heat bricks
for themselves, sometimes carried off Thea's, and thought it a good joke
to get ahead of her.

When Thea first plunged in between her red blankets, the cold sometimes
kept her awake for a good while, and she comforted herself by
remembering all she could of “Polar Explorations,” a fat, calf-bound
volume her father had bought from a book-agent, and by thinking about
the members of Greely's party: how they lay in their frozen
sleeping-bags, each man hoarding the warmth of his own body and trying
to make it last as long as possible against the on-coming cold that
would be everlasting. After half an hour or so, a warm wave crept over
her body and round, sturdy legs; she glowed like a little stove with the
warmth of her own blood, and the heavy quilts and red blankets grew warm
wherever they touched her, though her breath sometimes froze on the
coverlid. Before daylight, her internal fires went down a little, and
she often wakened to find herself drawn up into a tight ball, somewhat
stiff in the legs. But that made it all the easier to get up.

The acquisition of this room was the beginning of a new era in Thea's
life. It was one of the most important things that ever happened to her.
Hitherto, except in summer, when she could be out of doors, she had
lived in constant turmoil; the family, the day school, the
Sunday-School. The clamor about her drowned the voice within herself. In
the end of the wing, separated from the other upstairs sleeping-rooms by
a long, cold, unfinished lumber room, her mind worked better. She
thought things out more clearly. Pleasant plans and ideas occurred to
her which had never come before. She had certain thoughts which were
like companions, ideas which were like older and wiser friends. She left
them there in the morning, when she finished dressing in the cold, and
at night, when she came up with her lantern and shut the door after a
busy day, she found them awaiting her. There was no possible way of
heating the room, but that was fortunate, for otherwise it would have
been occupied by one of her older brothers.

From the time when she moved up into the wing, Thea began to live a
double life. During the day, when the hours were full of tasks, she was
one of the Kronborg children, but at night she was a different person.
On Friday and Saturday nights she always read for a long while after she
was in bed. She had no clock, and there was no one to nag her.

Ray Kennedy, on his way from the depot to his boardinghouse, often
looked up and saw Thea's light burning when the rest of the house was
dark, and felt cheered as by a friendly greeting. He was a faithful
soul, and many disappointments had not changed his nature. He was still,
at heart, the same boy who, when he was sixteen, had settled down to
freeze with his sheep in a Wyoming blizzard, and had been rescued only
to play the losing game of fidelity to other charges.

Ray had no very clear idea of what might be going on in Thea's head, but
he knew that something was. He used to remark to Spanish Johnny, “That
girl is developing something fine.” Thea was patient with Ray, even in
regard to the liberties he took with her name. Outside the family, every
one in Moonstone, except Wunsch and Dr. Archie, called her “Thee-a,” but
this seemed cold and distant to Ray, so he called her “Thee.” Once, in a
moment of exasperation, Thea asked him why he did this, and he explained
that he once had a chum, Theodore, whose name was always abbreviated
thus, and that since he was killed down on the Santa Fe, it seemed
natural to call somebody “Thee.” Thea sighed and submitted. She was
always helpless before homely sentiment and usually changed the subject.

It was the custom for each of the different Sunday Schools in Moonstone
to give a concert on Christmas Eve. But this year all the churches were
to unite and give, as was announced from the pulpits, “a semi-sacred
concert of picked talent” at the opera house. The Moonstone Orchestra,
under the direction of Professor Wunsch, was to play, and the most
talented members of each Sunday School were to take part in the
programme. Thea was put down by the committee “for instrumental.” This
made her indignant, for the vocal numbers were always more popular. Thea
went to the president of the committee and demanded hotly if her rival,
Lily Fisher, were going to sing. The president was a big, florid,
powdered woman, a fierce W.C.T.U. worker, one of Thea's natural enemies.
Her name was Johnson; her husband kept the livery stable, and she was
called Mrs. Livery Johnson, to distinguish her from other families of
the same surname. Mrs. Johnson was a prominent Baptist, and Lily Fisher
was the Baptist prodigy. There was a not very Christian rivalry between
the Baptist Church and Mr. Kronborg's church.

When Thea asked Mrs. Johnson whether her rival was to be allowed to
sing, Mrs. Johnson, with an eagerness which told how she had waited for
this moment, replied that “Lily was going to recite to be obliging, and
to give other children a chance to sing.” As she delivered this thrust,
her eyes glittered more than the Ancient Mariner's, Thea thought. Mrs.
Johnson disapproved of the way in which Thea was being brought up, of a
child whose chosen associates were Mexicans and sinners, and who was, as
she pointedly put it, “bold with men.” She so enjoyed an opportunity to
rebuke Thea, that, tightly corseted as she was, she could scarcely
control her breathing, and her lace and her gold watch chain rose and
fell “with short, uneasy motion.” Frowning, Thea turned away and walked
slowly homeward. She suspected guile. Lily Fisher was the most stuck-up
doll in the world, and it was certainly not like her to recite to be
obliging. Nobody who could sing ever recited, because the warmest
applause always went to the singers.

However, when the programme was printed in the Moonstone GLEAM, there it
was: “Instrumental solo, Thea Kronborg. Recitation, Lily Fisher.”

Because his orchestra was to play for the concert, Mr. Wunsch imagined
that he had been put in charge of the music, and he became arrogant. He
insisted that Thea should play a “Ballade” by Reinecke. When Thea
consulted her mother, Mrs. Kronborg agreed with her that the “Ballade”
 would “never take” with a Moonstone audience. She advised Thea to play
“something with variations,” or, at least, “The Invitation to the
Dance.”

“It makes no matter what they like,” Wunsch replied to Thea's
entreaties. “It is time already that they learn something.”

Thea's fighting powers had been impaired by an ulcerated tooth and
consequent loss of sleep, so she gave in. She finally had the molar
pulled, though it was a second tooth and should have been saved. The
dentist was a clumsy, ignorant country boy, and Mr. Kronborg would not
hear of Dr. Archie's taking Thea to a dentist in Denver, though Ray
Kennedy said he could get a pass for her. What with the pain of the
tooth, and family discussions about it, with trying to make Christmas
presents and to keep up her school work and practicing, and giving
lessons on Saturdays, Thea was fairly worn out.

On Christmas Eve she was nervous and excited. It was the first time she
had ever played in the opera house, and she had never before had to face
so many people. Wunsch would not let her play with her notes, and she
was afraid of forgetting. Before the concert began, all the participants
had to assemble on the stage and sit there to be looked at. Thea wore
her white summer dress and a blue sash, but Lily Fisher had a new pink
silk, trimmed with white swansdown.

The hall was packed. It seemed as if every one in Moonstone was there,
even Mrs. Kohler, in her hood, and old Fritz. The seats were wooden
kitchen chairs, numbered, and nailed to long planks which held them
together in rows. As the floor was not raised, the chairs were all on
the same level. The more interested persons in the audience peered over
the heads of the people in front of them to get a good view of the
stage. From the platform Thea picked out many friendly faces. There was
Dr. Archie, who never went to church entertainments; there was the
friendly jeweler who ordered her music for her,--he sold accordions and
guitars as well as watches,--and the druggist who often lent her books,
and her favorite teacher from the school. There was Ray Kennedy, with a
party of freshly barbered railroad men he had brought along with him.
There was Mrs. Kronborg with all the children, even Thor, who had been
brought out in a new white plush coat. At the back of the hall sat a
little group of Mexicans, and among them Thea caught the gleam of
Spanish Johnny's white teeth, and of Mrs. Tellamantez's lustrous,
smoothly coiled black hair.

After the orchestra played “Selections from Erminie,” and the Baptist
preacher made a long prayer, Tillie Kronborg came on with a highly
colored recitation, “The Polish Boy.” When it was over every one
breathed more freely. No committee had the courage to leave Tillie off a
programme. She was accepted as a trying feature of every entertainment.
The Progressive Euchre Club was the only social organization in the town
that entirely escaped Tillie. After Tillie sat down, the Ladies'
Quartette sang, “Beloved, it is Night,” and then it was Thea's turn.

The “Ballade” took ten minutes, which was five minutes too long. The
audience grew restive and fell to whispering. Thea could hear Mrs.
Livery Johnson's bracelets jangling as she fanned herself, and she could
hear her father's nervous, ministerial cough. Thor behaved better than
any one else. When Thea bowed and returned to her seat at the back of
the stage there was the usual applause, but it was vigorous only from
the back of the house where the Mexicans sat, and from Ray Kennedy's
CLAQUEURS. Any one could see that a good-natured audience had been
bored.

Because Mr. Kronborg's sister was on the programme, it had also been
necessary to ask the Baptist preacher's wife's cousin to sing. She was a
“deep alto” from McCook, and she sang, “Thy Sentinel Am I.” After her
came Lily Fisher. Thea's rival was also a blonde, but her hair was much
heavier than Thea's, and fell in long round curls over her shoulders.
She was the angel-child of the Baptists, and looked exactly like the
beautiful children on soap calendars. Her pink-and-white face, her set
smile of innocence, were surely born of a color-press. She had long,
drooping eyelashes, a little pursed-up mouth, and narrow, pointed teeth,
like a squirrel's.

Lily began:--

“ROCK OF AGES, CLEFT FOR ME, carelessly the maiden sang.”

Thea drew a long breath. That was the game; it was a recitation and a
song in one. Lily trailed the hymn through half a dozen verses with
great effect. The Baptist preacher had announced at the beginning of the
concert that “owing to the length of the programme, there would be no
encores.” But the applause which followed Lily to her seat was such an
unmistakable expression of enthusiasm that Thea had to admit Lily was
justified in going back. She was attended this time by Mrs. Livery
Johnson herself, crimson with triumph and gleaming-eyed, nervously
rolling and unrolling a sheet of music. She took off her bracelets and
played Lily's accompaniment. Lily had the effrontery to come out with,
“She sang the song of Home, Sweet Home, the song that touched my heart.”
 But this did not surprise Thea; as Ray said later in the evening, “the
cards had been stacked against her from the beginning.” The next issue
of the GLEAM correctly stated that “unquestionably the honors of the
evening must be accorded to Miss Lily Fisher.” The Baptists had
everything their own way.

After the concert Ray Kennedy joined the Kronborgs' party and walked
home with them. Thea was grateful for his silent sympathy, even while it
irritated her. She inwardly vowed that she would never take another
lesson from old Wunsch. She wished that her father would not keep
cheerfully singing, “When Shepherds Watched,” as he marched ahead,
carrying Thor. She felt that silence would become the Kronborgs for a
while. As a family, they somehow seemed a little ridiculous, trooping
along in the starlight. There were so many of them, for one thing. Then
Tillie was so absurd. She was giggling and talking to Anna just as if
she had not made, as even Mrs. Kronborg admitted, an exhibition of
herself.

When they got home, Ray took a box from his overcoat pocket and slipped
it into Thea's hand as he said goodnight. They all hurried in to the
glowing stove in the parlor. The sleepy children were sent to bed. Mrs.
Kronborg and Anna stayed up to fill the stockings.

“I guess you're tired, Thea. You needn't stay up.” Mrs. Kronborg's clear
and seemingly indifferent eye usually measured Thea pretty accurately.

Thea hesitated. She glanced at the presents laid out on the dining-room
table, but they looked unattractive. Even the brown plush monkey she had
bought for Thor with such enthusiasm seemed to have lost his wise and
humorous expression. She murmured, “All right,” to her mother, lit her
lantern, and went upstairs.

Ray's box contained a hand-painted white satin fan, with pond lilies--an
unfortunate reminder. Thea smiled grimly and tossed it into her upper
drawer. She was not to be consoled by toys. She undressed quickly and
stood for some time in the cold, frowning in the broken looking glass at
her flaxen pig-tails, at her white neck and arms. Her own broad,
resolute face set its chin at her, her eyes flashed into her own
defiantly. Lily Fisher was pretty, and she was willing to be just as big
a fool as people wanted her to be. Very well; Thea Kronborg wasn't. She
would rather be hated than be stupid, any day. She popped into bed and
read stubbornly at a queer paper book the drug-store man had given her
because he couldn't sell it. She had trained herself to put her mind on
what she was doing, otherwise she would have come to grief with her
complicated daily schedule. She read, as intently as if she had not been
flushed with anger, the strange “Musical Memories” of the Reverend H. R.
Haweis. At last she blew out the lantern and went to sleep. She had many
curious dreams that night. In one of them Mrs. Tellamantez held her
shell to Thea's ear, and she heard the roaring, as before, and distant
voices calling, “Lily Fisher! Lily Fisher!”




IX

Mr. Kronborg considered Thea a remarkable child; but so were all his
children remarkable. If one of the business men downtown remarked to him
that he “had a mighty bright little girl, there,” he admitted it, and at
once began to explain what a “long head for business” his son Gus had,
or that Charley was “a natural electrician,” and had put in a telephone
from the house to the preacher's study behind the church.

Mrs. Kronborg watched her daughter thoughtfully. She found her more
interesting than her other children, and she took her more seriously,
without thinking much about why she did so. The other children had to be
guided, directed, kept from conflicting with one another. Charley and
Gus were likely to want the same thing, and to quarrel about it. Anna
often demanded unreasonable service from her older brothers; that they
should sit up until after midnight to bring her home from parties when
she did not like the youth who had offered himself as her escort; or
that they should drive twelve miles into the country, on a winter night,
to take her to a ranch dance, after they had been working hard all day.
Gunner often got bored with his own clothes or stilts or sled, and
wanted Axel's. But Thea, from the time she was a little thing, had her
own routine. She kept out of every one's way, and was hard to manage
only when the other children interfered with her. Then there was trouble
indeed: bursts of temper which used to alarm Mrs. Kronborg. “You ought
to know enough to let Thea alone. She lets you alone,” she often said to
the other children.

One may have staunch friends in one's own family, but one seldom has
admirers. Thea, however, had one in the person of her addle-pated aunt,
Tillie Kronborg. In older countries, where dress and opinions and
manners are not so thoroughly standardized as in our own West, there is
a belief that people who are foolish about the more obvious things of
life are apt to have peculiar insight into what lies beyond the obvious.
The old woman who can never learn not to put the kerosene can on the
stove, may yet be able to tell fortunes, to persuade a backward child to
grow, to cure warts, or to tell people what to do with a young girl who
has gone melancholy. Tillie's mind was a curious machine; when she was
awake it went round like a wheel when the belt has slipped off, and when
she was asleep she dreamed follies. But she had intuitions. She knew,
for instance, that Thea was different from the other Kronborgs, worthy
though they all were. Her romantic imagination found possibilities in
her niece. When she was sweeping or ironing, or turning the ice-cream
freezer at a furious rate, she often built up brilliant futures for
Thea, adapting freely the latest novel she had read.

Tillie made enemies for her niece among the church people because, at
sewing societies and church suppers, she sometimes spoke vauntingly,
with a toss of her head, just as if Thea's “wonderfulness” were an
accepted fact in Moonstone, like Mrs. Archie's stinginess, or Mrs.
Livery Johnson's duplicity. People declared that, on this subject,
Tillie made them tired.

Tillie belonged to a dramatic club that once a year performed in the
Moonstone Opera House such plays as “Among the Breakers,” and “The
Veteran of 1812.” Tillie played character parts, the flirtatious old
maid or the spiteful INTRIGANTE. She used to study her parts up in the
attic at home. While she was committing the lines, she got Gunner or
Anna to hold the book for her, but when she began “to bring out the
expression,” as she said, she used, very timorously, to ask Thea to hold
the book. Thea was usually--not always--agreeable about it. Her mother
had told her that, since she had some influence with Tillie, it would be
a good thing for them all if she could tone her down a shade and “keep
her from taking on any worse than need be.” Thea would sit on the foot
of Tillie's bed, her feet tucked under her, and stare at the silly text.
“I wouldn't make so much fuss, there, Tillie,” she would remark
occasionally; “I don't see the point in it”; or, “What do you pitch your
voice so high for ? It don't carry half as well.”

“I don't see how it comes Thea is so patient with Tillie,” Mrs. Kronborg
more than once remarked to her husband. “She ain't patient with most
people, but it seems like she's got a peculiar patience for Tillie.”

Tillie always coaxed Thea to go “behind the scenes” with her when the
club presented a play, and help her with her make-up. Thea hated it, but
she always went. She felt as if she had to do it. There was something in
Tillie's adoration of her that compelled her. There was no family
impropriety that Thea was so much ashamed of as Tillie's “acting” and
yet she was always being dragged in to assist her. Tillie simply had
her, there. She didn't know why, but it was so. There was a string in
her somewhere that Tillie could pull; a sense of obligation to Tillie's
misguided aspirations. The saloon-keepers had some such feeling of
responsibility toward Spanish Johnny.

The dramatic club was the pride of Tillie's heart, and her enthusiasm
was the principal factor in keeping it together. Sick or well, Tillie
always attended rehearsals, and was always urging the young people, who
took rehearsals lightly, to “stop fooling and begin now.” The young
men--bank clerks, grocery clerks, insurance agents--played tricks,
laughed at Tillie, and “put it up on each other” about seeing her home;
but they often went to tiresome rehearsals just to oblige her. They were
good-natured young fellows. Their trainer and stage-manager was young
Upping, the jeweler who ordered Thea's music for her.

Though barely thirty, he had followed half a dozen professions, and had
once been a violinist in the orchestra of the Andrews Opera Company,
then well known in little towns throughout Colorado and Nebraska.

By one amazing indiscretion Tillie very nearly lost her hold upon the
Moonstone Drama Club. The club had decided to put on “The Drummer Boy of
Shiloh,” a very ambitious undertaking because of the many supers needed
and the scenic difficulties of the act which took place in Andersonville
Prison. The members of the club consulted together in Tillie's absence
as to who should play the part of the drummer boy. It must be taken by a
very young person, and village boys of that age are self-conscious and
are not apt at memorizing. The part was a long one, and clearly it must
be given to a girl. Some members of the club suggested Thea Kronborg,
others advocated Lily Fisher. Lily's partisans urged that she was much
prettier than Thea, and had a much “sweeter disposition.” Nobody denied
these facts. But there was nothing in the least boyish about Lily, and
she sang all songs and played all parts alike. Lily's simper was
popular, but it seemed not quite the right thing for the heroic drummer
boy.

Upping, the trainer, talked to one and another: “Lily's all right for
girl parts,” he insisted, “but you've got to get a girl with some ginger
in her for this. Thea's got the voice, too. When she sings, 'Just Before
the Battle, Mother,' she'll bring down the house.”

When all the members of the club had been privately consulted, they
announced their decision to Tillie at the first regular meeting that was
called to cast the parts. They expected Tillie to be overcome with joy,
but, on the contrary, she seemed embarrassed. “I'm afraid Thea hasn't
got time for that,” she said jerkily. “She is always so busy with her
music. Guess you'll have to get somebody else.”

The club lifted its eyebrows. Several of Lily Fisher's friends coughed.
Mr. Upping flushed. The stout woman who always played the injured wife
called Tillie's attention to the fact that this would be a fine
opportunity for her niece to show what she could do. Her tone was
condescending.

Tillie threw up her head and laughed; there was something sharp and wild
about Tillie's laugh--when it was not a giggle. “Oh, I guess Thea hasn't
got time to do any showing off. Her time to show off ain't come yet. I
expect she'll make us all sit up when it does. No use asking her to take
the part. She'd turn her nose up at it. I guess they'd be glad to get
her in the Denver Dramatics, if they could.”

The company broke up into groups and expressed their amazement. Of
course all Swedes were conceited, but they would never have believed
that all the conceit of all the Swedes put together would reach such a
pitch as this. They confided to each other that Tillie was “just a
little off, on the subject of her niece,” and agreed that it would be as
well not to excite her further. Tillie got a cold reception at
rehearsals for a long while afterward, and Thea had a crop of new
enemies without even knowing it.




X

Wunsch and old Fritz and Spanish Johnny celebrated Christmas together,
so riotously that Wunsch was unable to give Thea her lesson the next
day. In the middle of the vacation week Thea went to the Kohlers'
through a soft, beautiful snowstorm. The air was a tender blue-gray,
like the color on the doves that flew in and out of the white dove-house
on the post in the Kohlers' garden. The sand hills looked dim and
sleepy. The tamarisk hedge was full of snow, like a foam of blossoms
drifted over it. When Thea opened the gate, old Mrs. Kohler was just
coming in from the chicken yard, with five fresh eggs in her apron and a
pair of old top-boots on her feet. She called Thea to come and look at a
bantam egg, which she held up proudly. Her bantam hens were remiss in
zeal, and she was always delighted when they accomplished anything. She
took Thea into the sitting-room, very warm and smelling of food, and
brought her a plateful of little Christmas cakes, made according to old
and hallowed formulae, and put them before her while she warmed her
feet. Then she went to the door of the kitchen stairs and called: “Herr
Wunsch, Herr Wunsch!”

Wunsch came down wearing an old wadded jacket, with a velvet collar. The
brown silk was so worn that the wadding stuck out almost everywhere. He
avoided Thea's eyes when he came in, nodded without speaking, and
pointed directly to the piano stool. He was not so insistent upon the
scales as usual, and throughout the little sonata of Mozart's she was
studying, he remained languid and absent-minded. His eyes looked very
heavy, and he kept wiping them with one of the new silk handkerchiefs
Mrs. Kohler had given him for Christmas. When the lesson was over he did
not seem inclined to talk. Thea, loitering on the stool, reached for a
tattered book she had taken off the music-rest when she sat down. It was
a very old Leipsic edition of the piano score of Gluck's “Orpheus.” She
turned over the pages curiously.

“Is it nice ?” she asked.

“It is the most beautiful opera ever made,” Wunsch declared solemnly.
“You know the story, eh ? How, when she die, Orpheus went down below for
his wife ?”

“Oh, yes, I know. I didn't know there was an opera about it, though. Do
people sing this now ?”

“ABER JA! What else ? You like to try ? See.” He drew her from the stool
and sat down at the piano. Turning over the leaves to the third act, he
handed the score to Thea. “Listen, I play it through and you get the
RHYTHMUS. EINS, ZWEI, DREI, VIER.” He played through Orpheus' lament,
then pushed back his cuffs with awakening interest and nodded at Thea.
“Now, VOM BLATT, MIT MIR.”

“ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN, ALL' MEIN GLUCK IST NUN DAHIN.”

Wunsch sang the aria with much feeling. It was evidently one that was
very dear to him.

“NOCH EINMAL, alone, yourself.” He played the introductory measures,
then nodded at her vehemently, and she began:--

“ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN.”

When she finished, Wunsch nodded again. “SCHON,” he muttered as he
finished the accompaniment softly. He dropped his hands on his knees and
looked up at Thea. “That is very fine, eh ? There is no such beautiful
melody in the world. You can take the book for one week and learn
something, to pass the time. It is good to know--always. EURIDICE,
EU--RI--DI--CE, WEH DASS ICH AUF ERDEN BIN!” he sang softly, playing the
melody with his right hand.

Thea, who was turning over the pages of the third act, stopped and
scowled at a passage. The old German's blurred eyes watched her
curiously.

“For what do you look so, IMMER ?” puckering up his own face. “You see
something a little difficult, may-be, and you make such a face like it
was an enemy.”

Thea laughed, disconcerted. “Well, difficult things are enemies, aren't
they ? When you have to get them ?”

Wunsch lowered his head and threw it up as if he were butting something.
“Not at all! By no means.” He took the book from her and looked at it.
“Yes, that is not so easy, there. This is an old book. They do not print
it so now any more, I think. They leave it out, may-be. Only one woman
could sing that good.”

Thea looked at him in perplexity.

Wunsch went on. “It is written for alto, you see. A woman sings the
part, and there was only one to sing that good in there. You understand ?
Only one!” He glanced at her quickly and lifted his red forefinger
upright before her eyes.

Thea looked at the finger as if she were hypnotized. “Only one ?” she
asked breathlessly; her hands, hanging at her sides, were opening and
shutting rapidly.

Wunsch nodded and still held up that compelling finger. When he dropped
his hands, there was a look of satisfaction in his face.

“Was she very great ?”

Wunsch nodded.

“Was she beautiful ?”

“ABER GAR NICHT! Not at all. She was ugly; big mouth, big teeth, no
figure, nothing at all,” indicating a luxuriant bosom by sweeping his
hands over his chest. “A pole, a post! But for the voice--ACH! She have
something in there, behind the eyes,” tapping his temples.

Thea followed all his gesticulations intently. “Was she German ?”

“No, SPANISCH.” He looked down and frowned for a moment. “ACH, I tell
you, she look like the Frau Tellamantez, some-thing. Long face, long
chin, and ugly al-so.”

“Did she die a long while ago ?”

“Die ? I think not. I never hear, anyhow. I guess she is alive somewhere
in the world; Paris, may-be. But old, of course. I hear her when I was a
youth. She is too old to sing now any more.”

“Was she the greatest singer you ever heard ?”

Wunsch nodded gravely. “Quite so. She was the most--” he hunted for an
English word, lifted his hand over his head and snapped his fingers
noiselessly in the air, enunciating fiercely, “KUNST-LER-ISCH!” The word
seemed to glitter in his uplifted hand, his voice was so full of
emotion.

Wunsch rose from the stool and began to button his wadded jacket,
preparing to return to his half-heated room in the loft. Thea
regretfully put on her cloak and hood and set out for home.

When Wunsch looked for his score late that afternoon, he found that Thea
had not forgotten to take it with her. He smiled his loose, sarcastic
smile, and thoughtfully rubbed his stubbly chin with his red fingers.
When Fritz came home in the early blue twilight the snow was flying
faster, Mrs. Kohler was cooking HASENPFEFFER in the kitchen, and the
professor was seated at the piano, playing the Gluck, which he knew by
heart. Old Fritz took off his shoes quietly behind the stove and lay
down on the lounge before his masterpiece, where the firelight was
playing over the walls of Moscow. He listened, while the room grew
darker and the windows duller. Wunsch always came back to the same
thing:--

“ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN,...EURIDICE, EURIDICE!”

From time to time Fritz sighed softly. He, too, had lost a Euridice.




XI

One Saturday, late in June, Thea arrived early for her lesson. As she
perched herself upon the piano stool,--a wobbly, old-fashioned thing
that worked on a creaky screw,--she gave Wunsch a side glance, smiling.
“You must not be cross to me to-day. This is my birthday.”

“So ?” he pointed to the keyboard.

After the lesson they went out to join Mrs. Kohler, who had asked Thea
to come early, so that she could stay and smell the linden bloom. It was
one of those still days of intense light, when every particle of mica in
the soil flashed like a little mirror, and the glare from the plain
below seemed more intense than the rays from above. The sand ridges ran
glittering gold out to where the mirage licked them up, shining and
steaming like a lake in the tropics. The sky looked like blue lava,
forever incapable of clouds,--a turquoise bowl that was the lid of the
desert. And yet within Mrs. Kohler's green patch the water dripped, the
beds had all been hosed, and the air was fresh with rapidly evaporating
moisture.

The two symmetrical linden trees were the proudest things in the garden.
Their sweetness embalmed all the air. At every turn of the
paths,--whether one went to see the hollyhocks or the bleeding heart, or
to look at the purple morning-glories that ran over the
bean-poles,--wherever one went, the sweetness of the lindens struck one
afresh and one always came back to them. Under the round leaves, where
the waxen yellow blossoms hung, bevies of wild bees were buzzing. The
tamarisks were still pink, and the flower-beds were doing their best in
honor of the linden festival. The white dove-house was shining with a
fresh coat of paint, and the pigeons were crooning contentedly, flying
down often to drink at the drip from the water tank. Mrs. Kohler, who
was transplanting pansies, came up with her trowel and told Thea it was
lucky to have your birthday when the lindens were in bloom, and that she
must go and look at the sweet peas. Wunsch accompanied her, and as they
walked between the flower-beds he took Thea's hand.

“ES FLUSTERN UND SPRECHEN DIE BLUMEN,”--he muttered. “You know that von
Heine ? IM LEUCHTENDEN SOMMERMORGEN ?” He looked down at Thea and softly
pressed her hand.

“No, I don't know it. What does FLUSTERN mean ?”

“FLUSTERN ?--to whisper. You must begin now to know such things. That is
necessary. How many birthdays ?”

“Thirteen. I'm in my 'teens now. But how can I know words like that ? I
only know what you say at my lessons. They don't teach German at school.
How can I learn ?”

“It is always possible to learn when one likes,” said Wunsch. His words
were peremptory, as usual, but his tone was mild, even confidential.
“There is always a way. And if some day you are going to sing, it is
necessary to know well the German language.”

Thea stooped over to pick a leaf of rosemary. How did Wunsch know that,
when the very roses on her wall-paper had never heard it ? “But am I
going to ?” she asked, still stooping.

“That is for you to say,” returned Wunsch coldly. “You would better
marry some JACOB here and keep the house for him, may-be ? That is as one
desires.”

Thea flashed up at him a clear, laughing look. “No, I don't want to do
that. You know,” she brushed his coat sleeve quickly with her yellow
head. “Only how can I learn anything here ? It's so far from Denver.”

Wunsch's loose lower lip curled in amusement. Then, as if he suddenly
remembered something, he spoke seriously. “Nothing is far and nothing is
near, if one desires. The world is little, people are little, human life
is little. There is only one big thing--desire. And before it, when it
is big, all is little. It brought Columbus across the sea in a little
boat, UND SO WEITER.” Wunsch made a grimace, took his pupil's hand and
drew her toward the grape arbor. “Hereafter I will more speak to you in
German. Now, sit down and I will teach you for your birthday that little
song. Ask me the words you do not know already. Now: IM LEUCHTENDEN
SOMMERMORGEN.”

Thea memorized quickly because she had the power of listening intently.
In a few moments she could repeat the eight lines for him. Wunsch nodded
encouragingly and they went out of the arbor into the sunlight again. As
they went up and down the gravel paths between the flowerbeds, the white
and yellow butterflies kept darting before them, and the pigeons were
washing their pink feet at the drip and crooning in their husky bass.
Over and over again Wunsch made her say the lines to him. “You see it is
nothing. If you learn a great many of the LIEDER, you will know the
German language already. WEITER, NUN.” He would incline his head gravely
and listen.


     “IM LEUCHTENDEN SOMMERMORGEN
     GEH' ICH IM GARTEN HERUM;
     ES FLUSTERN UND SPRECHEN DIE BLUMEN,
     ICH ABER, ICH WANDTE STUMM.

     “ES FLUSTERN UND SPRECHEN DIE BLUMEN
     UND SCHAU'N MITLEIDIG MICH AN:
     'SEI UNSERER SCHWESTER NICHT BOSE,
     DU TRAURIGER, BLASSER MANN!'”


     (In the soft-shining summer morning
     I wandered the garden within.
     The flowers they whispered and murmured,
     But I, I wandered dumb.

     The flowers they whisper and murmur,
     And me with compassion they scan:
     “Oh, be not harsh to our sister,
     Thou sorrowful, death-pale man!”)


Wunsch had noticed before that when his pupil read anything in verse the
character of her voice changed altogether; it was no longer the voice
which spoke the speech of Moonstone. It was a soft, rich contralto, and
she read quietly; the feeling was in the voice itself, not indicated by
emphasis or change of pitch. She repeated the little verses musically,
like a song, and the entreaty of the flowers was even softer than the
rest, as the shy speech of flowers might be, and she ended with the
voice suspended, almost with a rising inflection. It was a nature-voice,
Wunsch told himself, breathed from the creature and apart from language,
like the sound of the wind in the trees, or the murmur of water.

“What is it the flowers mean when they ask him not to be harsh to their
sister, eh ?” he asked, looking down at her curiously and wrinkling his
dull red forehead.

Thea glanced at him in surprise. “I suppose he thinks they are asking
him not to be harsh to his sweetheart--or some girl they remind him of.”

“And why TRAURIGER, BLASSER MANN ?”

They had come back to the grape arbor, and Thea picked out a sunny place
on the bench, where a tortoise-shell cat was stretched at full length.
She sat down, bending over the cat and teasing his whiskers. “Because he
had been awake all night, thinking about her, wasn't it ? Maybe that was
why he was up so early.”

Wunsch shrugged his shoulders. “If he think about her all night already,
why do you say the flowers remind him ?”

Thea looked up at him in perplexity. A flash of comprehension lit her
face and she smiled eagerly. “Oh, I didn't mean 'remind' in that way! I
didn't mean they brought her to his mind! I meant it was only when he
came out in the morning, that she seemed to him like that,--like one of
the flowers.”

“And before he came out, how did she seem ?”

This time it was Thea who shrugged her shoulders. The warm smile left
her face. She lifted her eyebrows in annoyance and looked off at the
sand hills.

Wunsch persisted. “Why you not answer me ?”

“Because it would be silly. You are just trying to make me say things.
It spoils things to ask questions.”

Wunsch bowed mockingly; his smile was disagreeable. Suddenly his face
grew grave, grew fierce, indeed. He pulled himself up from his clumsy
stoop and folded his arms. “But it is necessary to know if you know some
things. Some things cannot be taught. If you not know in the beginning,
you not know in the end. For a singer there must be something in the
inside from the beginning. I shall not be long in this place, may-be,
and I like to know. Yes,”--he ground his heel in the gravel,--“yes, when
you are barely six, you must know that already. That is the beginning of
all things; DER GEIST, DIE PHANTASIE. It must be in the baby, when it
makes its first cry, like DER RHYTHMUS, or it is not to be. You have
some voice already, and if in the beginning, when you are with
things-to-play, you know that what you will not tell me, then you can
learn to sing, may-be.”

Wunsch began to pace the arbor, rubbing his hands together. The dark
flush of his face had spread up under the iron-gray bristles on his
head. He was talking to himself, not to Thea. Insidious power of the
linden bloom! “Oh, much you can learn! ABER NICHT DIE AMERICANISCHEN
FRAULEIN. They have nothing inside them,” striking his chest with both
fists. “They are like the ones in the MARCHEN, a grinning face and
hollow in the insides. Something they can learn, oh, yes, may-be! But
the secret--what make the rose to red, the sky to blue, the man to
love--IN DER BRUST, IN DER BRUST it is, UND OHNE DIESES GIEBT ES KEINE
KUNST, GIEBT ES KEINE KUNST!” He threw up his square hand and shook it,
all the fingers apart and wagging. Purple and breathless he went out of
the arbor and into the house, without saying good-bye. These outbursts
frightened Wunsch. They were always harbingers of ill.

Thea got her music-book and stole quietly out of the garden. She did not
go home, but wandered off into the sand dunes, where the prickly pear
was in blossom and the green lizards were racing each other in the
glittering light. She was shaken by a passionate excitement. She did not
altogether understand what Wunsch was talking about; and yet, in a way
she knew. She knew, of course, that there was something about her that
was different. But it was more like a friendly spirit than like anything
that was a part of herself. She thought everything to it, and it
answered her; happiness consisted of that backward and forward movement
of herself. The something came and went, she never knew how. Sometimes
she hunted for it and could not find it; again, she lifted her eyes from
a book, or stepped out of doors, or wakened in the morning, and it was
there,--under her cheek, it usually seemed to be, or over her breast,--a
kind of warm sureness. And when it was there, everything was more
interesting and beautiful, even people. When this companion was with
her, she could get the most wonderful things out of Spanish Johnny, or
Wunsch, or Dr. Archie.

On her thirteenth birthday she wandered for a long while about the sand
ridges, picking up crystals and looking into the yellow prickly-pear
blossoms with their thousand stamens. She looked at the sand hills until
she wished she WERE a sand hill. And yet she knew that she was going to
leave them all behind some day. They would be changing all day long,
yellow and purple and lavender, and she would not be there. From that
day on, she felt there was a secret between her and Wunsch. Together
they had lifted a lid, pulled out a drawer, and looked at something.
They hid it away and never spoke of what they had seen; but neither of
them forgot it.




XII

One July night, when the moon was full, Dr. Archie was coming up from
the depot, restless and discontented, wishing there were something to
do. He carried his straw hat in his hand, and kept brushing his hair
back from his forehead with a purposeless, unsatisfied gesture. After he
passed Uncle Billy Beemer's cottonwood grove, the sidewalk ran out of
the shadow into the white moonlight and crossed the sand gully on high
posts, like a bridge. As the doctor approached this trestle, he saw a
white figure, and recognized Thea Kronborg. He quickened his pace and
she came to meet him.

“What are you doing out so late, my girl ?” he asked as he took her hand.

“Oh, I don't know. What do people go to bed so early for ? I'd like to
run along before the houses and screech at them. Isn't it glorious out
here ?”

The young doctor gave a melancholy laugh and pressed her hand.

“Think of it,” Thea snorted impatiently. “Nobody up but us and the
rabbits! I've started up half a dozen of 'em. Look at that little one
down there now,”--she stooped and pointed. In the gully below them there
was, indeed, a little rabbit with a white spot of a tail, crouching down
on the sand, quite motionless. It seemed to be lapping up the moonlight
like cream. On the other side of the walk, down in the ditch, there was
a patch of tall, rank sunflowers, their shaggy leaves white with dust.
The moon stood over the cottonwood grove. There was no wind, and no
sound but the wheezing of an engine down on the tracks.

“Well, we may as well watch the rabbits.” Dr. Archie sat down on the
sidewalk and let his feet hang over the edge. He pulled out a smooth
linen handkerchief that smelled of German cologne water. “Well, how goes
it ? Working hard ? You must know about all Wunsch can teach you by this
time.”

Thea shook her head. “Oh, no, I don't, Dr. Archie. He's hard to get at,
but he's been a real musician in his time. Mother says she believes he's
forgotten more than the music-teachers down in Denver ever knew.”

“I'm afraid he won't be around here much longer,” said Dr. Archie. “He's
been making a tank of himself lately. He'll be pulling his freight one
of these days. That's the way they do, you know. I'll be sorry on your
account.” He paused and ran his fresh handkerchief over his face. “What
the deuce are we all here for anyway, Thea ?” he said abruptly.

“On earth, you mean ?” Thea asked in a low voice.

“Well, primarily, yes. But secondarily, why are we in Moonstone ? It
isn't as if we'd been born here. You were, but Wunsch wasn't, and I
wasn't. I suppose I'm here because I married as soon as I got out of
medical school and had to get a practice quick. If you hurry things, you
always get left in the end. I don't learn anything here, and as for the
people--In my own town in Michigan, now, there were people who liked me
on my father's account, who had even known my grandfather. That meant
something. But here it's all like the sand: blows north one day and
south the next. We're all a lot of gamblers without much nerve, playing
for small stakes. The railroad is the one real fact in this country.
That has to be; the world has to be got back and forth. But the rest of
us are here just because it's the end of a run and the engine has to
have a drink. Some day I'll get up and find my hair turning gray, and
I'll have nothing to show for it.”

Thea slid closer to him and caught his arm. “No, no. I won't let you get
gray. You've got to stay young for me. I'm getting young now, too.”

Archie laughed. “Getting ?”

“Yes. People aren't young when they're children. Look at Thor, now; he's
just a little old man. But Gus has a sweetheart, and he's young!”

“Something in that!” Dr. Archie patted her head, and then felt the shape
of her skull gently, with the tips of his fingers. “When you were
little, Thea, I used always to be curious about the shape of your head.
You seemed to have more inside it than most youngsters. I haven't
examined it for a long time. Seems to be the usual shape, but uncommonly
hard, some how. What are you going to do with yourself, anyway ?”

“I don't know.”

“Honest, now ?” He lifted her chin and looked into her eyes.

Thea laughed and edged away from him.

“You've got something up your sleeve, haven't you ? Anything you like;
only don't marry and settle down here without giving yourself a chance,
will you ?”

“Not much. See, there's another rabbit!”

“That's all right about the rabbits, but I don't want you to get tied
up. Remember that.”

Thea nodded. “Be nice to Wunsch, then. I don't know what I'd do if he
went away.”

“You've got older friends than Wunsch here, Thea.”

“I know.” Thea spoke seriously and looked up at the moon, propping her
chin on her hand. “But Wunsch is the only one that can teach me what I
want to know. I've got to learn to do something well, and that's the
thing I can do best.”

“Do you want to be a music-teacher ?”

“Maybe, but I want to be a good one. I'd like to go to Germany to study,
some day. Wunsch says that's the best place,--the only place you can
really learn.” Thea hesitated and then went on nervously, “I've got a
book that says so, too. It's called 'My Musical Memories.' It made me
want to go to Germany even before Wunsch said anything. Of course it's a
secret. You're the first one I've told.”

Dr. Archie smiled indulgently. “That's a long way off. Is that what
you've got in your hard noddle ?” He put his hand on her hair, but this
time she shook him off.

“No, I don't think much about it. But you talk about going, and a body
has to have something to go TO!”

“That's so.” Dr. Archie sighed. “You're lucky if you have. Poor Wunsch,
now, he hasn't. What do such fellows come out here for ? He's been asking
me about my mining stock, and about mining towns. What would he do in a
mining town ? He wouldn't know a piece of ore if he saw one. He's got
nothing to sell that a mining town wants to buy. Why don't those old
fellows stay at home ? We won't need them for another hundred years. An
engine wiper can get a job, but a piano player! Such people can't make
good.”

“My grandfather Alstrom was a musician, and he made good.”

Dr. Archie chuckled. “Oh, a Swede can make good anywhere, at anything!
You've got that in your favor, miss. Come, you must be getting home.”

Thea rose. “Yes, I used to be ashamed of being a Swede, but I'm not any
more. Swedes are kind of common, but I think it's better to be
SOMETHING.”

“It surely is! How tall you are getting. You come above my shoulder
now.”

“I'll keep on growing, don't you think ? I particularly want to be tall.
Yes, I guess I must go home. I wish there'd be a fire.”

“A fire ?”

“Yes, so the fire-bell would ring and the roundhouse whistle would blow,
and everybody would come running out. Sometime I'm going to ring the
fire-bell myself and stir them all up.”

“You'd be arrested.”

“Well, that would be better than going to bed.”

“I'll have to lend you some more books.”

Thea shook herself impatiently. “I can't read every night.”

Dr. Archie gave one of his low, sympathetic chuckles as he opened the
gate for her. “You're beginning to grow up, that's what's the matter
with you. I'll have to keep an eye on you. Now you'll have to say
good-night to the moon.”

“No, I won't. I sleep on the floor now, right in the moonlight. My
window comes down to the floor, and I can look at the sky all night.”

She shot round the house to the kitchen door, and Dr. Archie watched her
disappear with a sigh. He thought of the hard, mean, frizzy little woman
who kept his house for him; once the belle of a Michigan town, now dry
and withered up at thirty. “If I had a daughter like Thea to watch,” he
reflected, “I wouldn't mind anything. I wonder if all of my life's going
to be a mistake just because I made a big one then ? Hardly seems fair.”

Howard Archie was “respected” rather than popular in Moonstone. Everyone
recognized that he was a good physician, and a progressive Western town
likes to be able to point to a handsome, well-set-up, well-dressed man
among its citizens. But a great many people thought Archie “distant,”
 and they were right. He had the uneasy manner of a man who is not among
his own kind, and who has not seen enough of the world to feel that all
people are in some sense his own kind. He knew that every one was
curious about his wife, that she played a sort of character part in
Moonstone, and that people made fun of her, not very delicately. Her own
friends--most of them women who were distasteful to Archie--liked to ask
her to contribute to church charities, just to see how mean she could
be. The little, lop-sided cake at the church supper, the cheapest
pincushion, the skimpiest apron at the bazaar, were always Mrs. Archie's
contribution.

All this hurt the doctor's pride. But if there was one thing he had
learned, it was that there was no changing Belle's nature. He had
married a mean woman; and he must accept the consequences. Even in
Colorado he would have had no pretext for divorce, and, to do him
justice, he had never thought of such a thing. The tenets of the
Presbyterian Church in which he had grown up, though he had long ceased
to believe in them, still influenced his conduct and his conception of
propriety. To him there was something vulgar about divorce. A divorced
man was a disgraced man; at least, he had exhibited his hurt, and made
it a matter for common gossip. Respectability was so necessary to Archie
that he was willing to pay a high price for it. As long as he could keep
up a decent exterior, he could manage to get on; and if he could have
concealed his wife's littleness from all his friends, he would scarcely
have complained. He was more afraid of pity than he was of any
unhappiness. Had there been another woman for whom he cared greatly, he
might have had plenty of courage; but he was not likely to meet such a
woman in Moonstone.

There was a puzzling timidity in Archie's make-up. The thing that held
his shoulders stiff, that made him resort to a mirthless little laugh
when he was talking to dull people, that made him sometimes stumble over
rugs and carpets, had its counterpart in his mind. He had not the
courage to be an honest thinker. He could comfort himself by evasions
and compromises. He consoled himself for his own marriage by telling
himself that other people's were not much better. In his work he saw
pretty deeply into marital relations in Moonstone, and he could honestly
say that there were not many of his friends whom he envied. Their wives
seemed to suit them well enough, but they would never have suited him.

Although Dr. Archie could not bring himself to regard marriage merely as
a social contract, but looked upon it as somehow made sacred by a church
in which he did not believe,--as a physician he knew that a young man
whose marriage is merely nominal must yet go on living his life. When he
went to Denver or to Chicago, he drifted about in careless company where
gayety and good-humor can be bought, not because he had any taste for
such society, but because he honestly believed that anything was better
than divorce. He often told himself that “hanging and wiving go by
destiny.” If wiving went badly with a man,--and it did oftener than
not,--then he must do the best he could to keep up appearances and help
the tradition of domestic happiness along. The Moonstone gossips,
assembled in Mrs. Smiley's millinery and notion store, often discussed
Dr. Archie's politeness to his wife, and his pleasant manner of speaking
about her. “Nobody has ever got a thing out of him yet,” they agreed.
And it was certainly not because no one had ever tried.

When he was down in Denver, feeling a little jolly, Archie could forget
how unhappy he was at home, and could even make himself believe that he
missed his wife. He always bought her presents, and would have liked to
send her flowers if she had not repeatedly told him never to send her
anything but bulbs,--which did not appeal to him in his expansive
moments. At the Denver Athletic Club banquets, or at dinner with his
colleagues at the Brown Palace Hotel, he sometimes spoke sentimentally
about “little Mrs. Archie,” and he always drank the toast “to our wives,
God bless them!” with gusto.

The determining factor about Dr. Archie was that he was romantic. He had
married Belle White because he was romantic--too romantic to know
anything about women, except what he wished them to be, or to repulse a
pretty girl who had set her cap for him. At medical school, though he
was a rather wild boy in behavior, he had always disliked coarse jokes
and vulgar stories. In his old Flint's Physiology there was still a poem
he had pasted there when he was a student; some verses by Dr. Oliver
Wendell Holmes about the ideals of the medical profession. After so much
and such disillusioning experience with it, he still had a romantic
feeling about the human body; a sense that finer things dwelt in it than
could be explained by anatomy. He never jested about birth or death or
marriage, and did not like to hear other doctors do it. He was a good
nurse, and had a reverence for the bodies of women and children. When he
was tending them, one saw him at his best. Then his constraint and
self-consciousness fell away from him. He was easy, gentle, competent,
master of himself and of other people. Then the idealist in him was not
afraid of being discovered and ridiculed.

In his tastes, too, the doctor was romantic. Though he read Balzac all
the year through, he still enjoyed the Waverley Novels as much as when
he had first come upon them, in thick leather-bound volumes, in his
grandfather's library. He nearly always read Scott on Christmas and
holidays, because it brought back the pleasures of his boyhood so
vividly. He liked Scott's women. Constance de Beverley and the minstrel
girl in “The Fair Maid of Perth,” not the Duchesse de Langeais, were his
heroines. But better than anything that ever got from the heart of a man
into printer's ink, he loved the poetry of Robert Burns. “Death and Dr.
Hornbook” and “The Jolly Beggars,” Burns's “Reply to his Tailor,” he
often read aloud to himself in his office, late at night, after a glass
of hot toddy. He used to read “Tam o'Shanter” to Thea Kronborg, and he
got her some of the songs, set to the old airs for which they were
written. He loved to hear her sing them. Sometimes when she sang, “Oh,
wert thou in the cauld blast,” the doctor and even Mr. Kronborg joined
in. Thea never minded if people could not sing; she directed them with
her head and somehow carried them along. When her father got off the
pitch she let her own voice out and covered him.




XIII

At the beginning of June, when school closed, Thea had told Wunsch that
she didn't know how much practicing she could get in this summer because
Thor had his worst teeth still to cut.

“My God! all last summer he was doing that!” Wunsch exclaimed furiously.

“I know, but it takes them two years, and Thor is slow,” Thea answered
reprovingly.

The summer went well beyond her hopes, however. She told herself that it
was the best summer of her life, so far. Nobody was sick at home, and
her lessons were uninterrupted. Now that she had four pupils of her own
and made a dollar a week, her practicing was regarded more seriously by
the household. Her mother had always arranged things so that she could
have the parlor four hours a day in summer. Thor proved a friendly ally.
He behaved handsomely about his molars, and never objected to being
pulled off into remote places in his cart. When Thea dragged him over
the hill and made a camp under the shade of a bush or a bank, he would
waddle about and play with his blocks, or bury his monkey in the sand
and dig him up again. Sometimes he got into the cactus and set up a
howl, but usually he let his sister read peacefully, while he coated his
hands and face, first with an all-day sucker and then with gravel.

Life was pleasant and uneventful until the first of September, when
Wunsch began to drink so hard that he was unable to appear when Thea
went to take her mid-week lesson, and Mrs. Kohler had to send her home
after a tearful apology. On Saturday morning she set out for the
Kohlers' again, but on her way, when she was crossing the ravine, she
noticed a woman sitting at the bottom of the gulch, under the railroad
trestle. She turned from her path and saw that it was Mrs. Tellamantez,
and she seemed to be doing drawn-work. Then Thea noticed that there was
something beside her, covered up with a purple and yellow Mexican
blanket. She ran up the gulch and called to Mrs. Tellamantez. The
Mexican woman held up a warning finger. Thea glanced at the blanket and
recognized a square red hand which protruded. The middle finger twitched
slightly.

“Is he hurt ?” she gasped.

Mrs. Tellamantez shook her head. “No; very sick. He knows nothing,” she
said quietly, folding her hands over her drawn-work.

Thea learned that Wunsch had been out all night, that this morning Mrs.
Kohler had gone to look for him and found him under the trestle covered
with dirt and cinders. Probably he had been trying to get home and had
lost his way. Mrs. Tellamantez was watching beside the unconscious man
while Mrs. Kohler and Johnny went to get help.

“You better go home now, I think,” said Mrs. Tellamantez, in closing her
narration.

Thea hung her head and looked wistfully toward the blanket.

“Couldn't I just stay till they come ?” she asked. “I'd like to know if
he's very bad.”

“Bad enough,” sighed Mrs. Tellamantez, taking up her work again.

Thea sat down under the narrow shade of one of the trestle posts and
listened to the locusts rasping in the hot sand while she watched Mrs.
Tellamantez evenly draw her threads. The blanket looked as if it were
over a heap of bricks.

“I don't see him breathing any,” she said anxiously.

“Yes, he breathes,” said Mrs. Tellamantez, not lifting her eyes.

It seemed to Thea that they waited for hours. At last they heard voices,
and a party of men came down the hill and up the gulch. Dr. Archie and
Fritz Kohler came first; behind were Johnny and Ray, and several men
from the roundhouse. Ray had the canvas litter that was kept at the
depot for accidents on the road. Behind them trailed half a dozen boys
who had been hanging round the depot.

When Ray saw Thea, he dropped his canvas roll and hurried forward.
“Better run along home, Thee. This is ugly business.” Ray was indignant
that anybody who gave Thea music lessons should behave in such a manner.

Thea resented both his proprietary tone and his superior virtue. “I
won't. I want to know how bad he is. I'm not a baby!” she exclaimed
indignantly, stamping her foot into the sand.

Dr. Archie, who had been kneeling by the blanket, got up and came toward
Thea, dusting his knees. He smiled and nodded confidentially. “He'll be
all right when we get him home. But he wouldn't want you to see him like
this, poor old chap! Understand ? Now, skip!”

Thea ran down the gulch and looked back only once, to see them lifting
the canvas litter with Wunsch upon it, still covered with the blanket.

The men carried Wunsch up the hill and down the road to the Kohlers'.
Mrs. Kohler had gone home and made up a bed in the sitting-room, as she
knew the litter could not be got round the turn in the narrow stairway.
Wunsch was like a dead man. He lay unconscious all day. Ray Kennedy
stayed with him till two o'clock in the afternoon, when he had to go out
on his run. It was the first time he had ever been inside the Kohlers'
house, and he was so much impressed by Napoleon that the piece-picture
formed a new bond between him and Thea.

Dr. Archie went back at six o'clock, and found Mrs. Kohler and Spanish
Johnny with Wunsch, who was in a high fever, muttering and groaning.

“There ought to be some one here to look after him to-night, Mrs.
Kohler,” he said. “I'm on a confinement case, and I can't be here, but
there ought to be somebody. He may get violent.”

Mrs. Kohler insisted that she could always do anything with Wunsch, but
the doctor shook his head and Spanish Johnny grinned. He said he would
stay. The doctor laughed at him. “Ten fellows like you couldn't hold
him, Spanish, if he got obstreperous; an Irishman would have his hands
full. Guess I'd better put the soft pedal on him.” He pulled out his
hypodermic.

Spanish Johnny stayed, however, and the Kohlers went to bed. At about
two o'clock in the morning Wunsch rose from his ignominious cot. Johnny,
who was dozing on the lounge, awoke to find the German standing in the
middle of the room in his undershirt and drawers, his arms bare, his
heavy body seeming twice its natural girth. His face was snarling and
savage, and his eyes were crazy. He had risen to avenge himself, to wipe
out his shame, to destroy his enemy. One look was enough for Johnny.
Wunsch raised a chair threateningly, and Johnny, with the lightness of a
PICADOR, darted under the missile and out of the open window. He shot
across the gully to get help, meanwhile leaving the Kohlers to their
fate.

Fritz, upstairs, heard the chair crash upon the stove. Then he heard
doors opening and shutting, and some one stumbling about in the
shrubbery of the garden. He and Paulina sat up in bed and held a
consultation. Fritz slipped from under the covers, and going cautiously
over to the window, poked out his head. Then he rushed to the door and
bolted it.

“MEIN GOTT, Paulina,” he gasped, “he has the axe, he will kill us!”

“The dresser,” cried Mrs. Kohler; “push the dresser before the door.
ACH, if you had your rabbit gun, now!”

“It is in the barn,” said Fritz sadly. “It would do no good; he would
not be afraid of anything now. Stay you in the bed, Paulina.” The
dresser had lost its casters years ago, but he managed to drag it in
front of the door. “He is in the garden. He makes nothing. He will get
sick again, may-be.”

Fritz went back to bed and his wife pulled the quilt over him and made
him lie down. They heard stumbling in the garden again, then a smash of
glass.

“ACH, DAS MISTBEET!” gasped Paulina, hearing her hotbed shivered. “The
poor soul, Fritz, he will cut himself. ACH! what is that ?” They both sat
up in bed. “WIEDER! ACH, What is he doing ?”

The noise came steadily, a sound of chopping. Paulina tore off her
night-cap. “DIE BAUME, DIE BAUME! He is cutting our trees, Fritz!” Before
her husband could prevent her, she had sprung from the bed and rushed to
the window. “DER TAUBENSCHLAG! GERECHTER HIMMEL, he is chopping the
dove-house down!”

Fritz reached her side before she had got her breath again, and poked
his head out beside hers. There, in the faint starlight, they saw a
bulky man, barefoot, half dressed, chopping away at the white post that
formed the pedestal of the dove-house. The startled pigeons were
croaking and flying about his head, even beating their wings in his
face, so that he struck at them furiously with the axe. In a few seconds
there was a crash, and Wunsch had actually felled the dove-house.

“Oh, if only it is not the trees next!” prayed Paulina. “The dove-house
you can make new again, but not DIE BAUME.”

They watched breathlessly. In the garden below Wunsch stood in the
attitude of a woodman, contemplating the fallen cote. Suddenly he threw
the axe over his shoulder and went out of the front gate toward the
town.

“The poor soul, he will meet his death!” Mrs. Kohler wailed. She ran
back to her feather bed and hid her face in the pillow.

Fritz kept watch at the window. “No, no, Paulina,” he called presently;
“I see lanterns coming. Johnny must have gone for somebody. Yes, four
lanterns, coming along the gulch. They stop; they must have seen him
already. Now they are under the hill and I cannot see them, but I think
they have him. They will bring him back. I must dress and go down.” He
caught his trousers and began pulling them on by the window. “Yes, here
they come, half a dozen men. And they have tied him with a rope,
Paulina!”

“ACH, the poor man! To be led like a cow,” groaned Mrs. Kohler. “Oh, it
is good that he has no wife!” She was reproaching herself for nagging
Fritz when he drank himself into foolish pleasantry or mild sulks, and
felt that she had never before appreciated her blessings.


Wunsch was in bed for ten days, during which time he was gossiped about
and even preached about in Moonstone. The Baptist preacher took a shot
at the fallen man from his pulpit, Mrs. Livery Johnson nodding
approvingly from her pew. The mothers of Wunsch's pupils sent him notes
informing him that their daughters would discontinue their
music-lessons. The old maid who had rented him her piano sent the town
dray for her contaminated instrument, and ever afterward declared that
Wunsch had ruined its tone and scarred its glossy finish. The Kohlers
were unremitting in their kindness to their friend. Mrs. Kohler made him
soups and broths without stint, and Fritz repaired the dove-house and
mounted it on a new post, lest it might be a sad reminder.

As soon as Wunsch was strong enough to sit about in his slippers and
wadded jacket, he told Fritz to bring him some stout thread from the
shop. When Fritz asked what he was going to sew, he produced the
tattered score of “Orpheus” and said he would like to fix it up for a
little present. Fritz carried it over to the shop and stitched it into
pasteboards, covered with dark suiting-cloth. Over the stitches he glued
a strip of thin red leather which he got from his friend, the
harness-maker. After Paulina had cleaned the pages with fresh bread,
Wunsch was amazed to see what a fine book he had. It opened stiffly, but
that was no matter.

Sitting in the arbor one morning, under the ripe grapes and the brown,
curling leaves, with a pen and ink on the bench beside him and the Gluck
score on his knee, Wunsch pondered for a long while. Several times he
dipped the pen in the ink, and then put it back again in the cigar box
in which Mrs. Kohler kept her writing utensils. His thoughts wandered
over a wide territory; over many countries and many years. There was no
order or logical sequence in his ideas. Pictures came and went without
reason. Faces, mountains, rivers, autumn days in other vineyards far
away. He thought of a FUSZREISE he had made through the Hartz Mountains
in his student days; of the innkeeper's pretty daughter who had lighted
his pipe for him in the garden one summer evening, of the woods above
Wiesbaden, haymakers on an island in the river. The roundhouse whistle
woke him from his reveries. Ah, yes, he was in Moonstone, Colorado. He
frowned for a moment and looked at the book on his knee. He had thought
of a great many appropriate things to write in it, but suddenly he
rejected all of them, opened the book, and at the top of the
much-engraved title-page he wrote rapidly in purple ink:--

     EINST, O WUNDER!--

     A. WUNSCH.
     MOONSTONE, COLO.
     SEPTEMBER 30, 18--


Nobody in Moonstone ever found what Wunsch's first name was. That “A”
 may have stood for Adam, or August, or even Amadeus; he got very angry
if any one asked him.

He remained A. Wunsch to the end of his chapter there. When he presented
this score to Thea, he told her that in ten years she would either know
what the inscription meant, or she would not have the least idea, in
which case it would not matter.

When Wunsch began to pack his trunk, both the Kohlers were very unhappy.
He said he was coming back some day, but that for the present, since he
had lost all his pupils, it would be better for him to try some “new
town.” Mrs. Kohler darned and mended all his clothes, and gave him two
new shirts she had made for Fritz. Fritz made him a new pair of trousers
and would have made him an overcoat but for the fact that overcoats were
so easy to pawn.

Wunsch would not go across the ravine to the town until he went to take
the morning train for Denver. He said that after he got to Denver he
would “look around.” He left Moonstone one bright October morning,
without telling any one good-bye. He bought his ticket and went directly
into the smoking-car. When the train was beginning to pull out, he heard
his name called frantically, and looking out of the window he saw Thea
Kronborg standing on the siding, bareheaded and panting. Some boys had
brought word to school that they saw Wunsch's trunk going over to the
station, and Thea had run away from school. She was at the end of the
station platform, her hair in two braids, her blue gingham dress wet to
the knees because she had run across lots through the weeds. It had
rained during the night, and the tall sunflowers behind her were fresh
and shining.

“Good-bye, Herr Wunsch, good-bye!” she called waving to him.

He thrust his head out at the car window and called back, “LEBEN SIE
WOHL, LEBEN SIE WOHL, MEIN KIND!” He watched her until the train swept
around the curve beyond the roundhouse, and then sank back into his
seat, muttering, “She had been running. Ah, she will run a long way;
they cannot stop her!”

What was it about the child that one believed in ? Was it her dogged
industry, so unusual in this free-and-easy country ? Was it her
imagination ? More likely it was because she had both imagination and a
stubborn will, curiously balancing and interpenetrating each other.
There was something unconscious and unawakened about her, that tempted
curiosity. She had a kind of seriousness that he had not met with in a
pupil before. She hated difficult things, and yet she could never pass
one by. They seemed to challenge her; she had no peace until she
mastered them. She had the power to make a great effort, to lift a
weight heavier than herself. Wunsch hoped he would always remember her
as she stood by the track, looking up at him; her broad eager face, so
fair in color, with its high cheek-bones, yellow eyebrows and
greenishhazel eyes. It was a face full of light and energy, of the
unquestioning hopefulness of first youth. Yes, she was like a flower
full of sun, but not the soft German flowers of his childhood. He had it
now, the comparison he had absently reached for before: she was like the
yellow prickly pear blossoms that open there in the desert; thornier and
sturdier than the maiden flowers he remembered; not so sweet, but
wonderful.


That night Mrs. Kohler brushed away many a tear as she got supper and
set the table for two. When they sat down, Fritz was more silent than
usual. People who have lived long together need a third at table: they
know each other's thoughts so well that they have nothing left to say.
Mrs. Kohler stirred and stirred her coffee and clattered the spoon, but
she had no heart for her supper. She felt, for the first time in years,
that she was tired of her own cooking. She looked across the glass lamp
at her husband and asked him if the butcher liked his new overcoat, and
whether he had got the shoulders right in a ready-made suit he was
patching over for Ray Kennedy. After supper Fritz offered to wipe the
dishes for her, but she told him to go about his business, and not to
act as if she were sick or getting helpless.

When her work in the kitchen was all done, she went out to cover the
oleanders against frost, and to take a last look at her chickens. As she
came back from the hen-house she stopped by one of the linden trees and
stood resting her hand on the trunk. He would never come back, the poor
man; she knew that. He would drift on from new town to new town, from
catastrophe to catastrophe. He would hardly find a good home for himself
again. He would die at last in some rough place, and be buried in the
desert or on the wild prairie, far enough from any linden tree!

Fritz, smoking his pipe on the kitchen doorstep, watched his Paulina and
guessed her thoughts. He, too, was sorry to lose his friend. But Fritz
was getting old; he had lived a long while and had learned to lose
without struggle.




XIV

“Mother,” said Peter Kronborg to his wife one morning about two weeks
after Wunsch's departure, “how would you like to drive out to Copper
Hole with me to-day ?”

Mrs. Kronborg said she thought she would enjoy the drive. She put on her
gray cashmere dress and gold watch and chain, as befitted a minister's
wife, and while her husband was dressing she packed a black oilcloth
satchel with such clothing as she and Thor would need overnight.

Copper Hole was a settlement fifteen miles northwest of Moonstone where
Mr. Kronborg preached every Friday evening. There was a big spring there
and a creek and a few irrigating ditches. It was a community of
discouraged agriculturists who had disastrously experimented with dry
farming. Mr. Kronborg always drove out one day and back the next,
spending the night with one of his parishioners. Often, when the weather
was fine, his wife accompanied him. To-day they set out from home after
the midday meal, leaving Tillie in charge of the house. Mrs. Kronborg's
maternal feeling was always garnered up in the baby, whoever the baby
happened to be. If she had the baby with her, the others could look out
for themselves. Thor, of course, was not, accurately speaking, a baby
any longer. In the matter of nourishment he was quite independent of his
mother, though this independence had not been won without a struggle.
Thor was conservative in all things, and the whole family had anguished
with him when he was being weaned. Being the youngest, he was still the
baby for Mrs. Kronborg, though he was nearly four years old and sat up
boldly on her lap this afternoon, holding on to the ends of the lines
and shouting “'mup, 'mup, horsey.” His father watched him affectionately
and hummed hymn tunes in the jovial way that was sometimes such a trial
to Thea.

Mrs. Kronborg was enjoying the sunshine and the brilliant sky and all
the faintly marked features of the dazzling, monotonous landscape. She
had a rather unusual capacity for getting the flavor of places and of
people. Although she was so enmeshed in family cares most of the time,
she could emerge serene when she was away from them. For a mother of
seven, she had a singularly unprejudiced point of view. She was,
moreover, a fatalist, and as she did not attempt to direct things beyond
her control, she found a good deal of time to enjoy the ways of man and
nature.

When they were well upon their road, out where the first lean pasture
lands began and the sand grass made a faint showing between the
sagebrushes, Mr. Kronborg dropped his tune and turned to his wife.
“Mother, I've been thinking about something.”

“I guessed you had. What is it ?” She shifted Thor to her left knee,
where he would be more out of the way.

“Well, it's about Thea. Mr. Follansbee came to my study at the church
the other day and said they would like to have their two girls take
lessons of Thea. Then I sounded Miss Meyers” (Miss Meyers was the
organist in Mr. Kronborg's church) “and she said there was a good deal
of talk about whether Thea wouldn't take over Wunsch's pupils. She said
if Thea stopped school she wouldn't wonder if she could get pretty much
all Wunsch's class. People think Thea knows about all Wunsch could
teach.”

Mrs. Kronborg looked thoughtful. “Do you think we ought to take her out
of school so young ?”

“She is young, but next year would be her last year anyway. She's far
along for her age. And she can't learn much under the principal we've
got now, can she ?”

“No, I'm afraid she can't,” his wife admitted. “She frets a good deal
and says that man always has to look in the back of the book for the
answers. She hates all that diagramming they have to do, and I think
myself it's a waste of time.”

Mr. Kronborg settled himself back into the seat and slowed the mare to a
walk. “You see, it occurs to me that we might raise Thea's prices, so it
would be worth her while. Seventy-five cents for hour lessons, fifty
cents for half-hour lessons. If she got, say two thirds of Wunsch's
class, that would bring her in upwards of ten dollars a week. Better pay
than teaching a country school, and there would be more work in vacation
than in winter. Steady work twelve months in the year; that's an
advantage. And she'd be living at home, with no expenses.”

“There'd be talk if you raised her prices,” said Mrs. Kronborg
dubiously.

“At first there would. But Thea is so much the best musician in town
that they'd all come into line after a while. A good many people in
Moonstone have been making money lately, and have bought new pianos.
There were ten new pianos shipped in here from Denver in the last year.
People ain't going to let them stand idle; too much money invested. I
believe Thea can have as many scholars as she can handle, if we set her
up a little.”

“How set her up, do you mean ?” Mrs. Kronborg felt a certain reluctance
about accepting this plan, though she had not yet had time to think out
her reasons.

“Well, I've been thinking for some time we could make good use of
another room. We couldn't give up the parlor to her all the time. If we
built another room on the ell and put the piano in there, she could give
lessons all day long and it wouldn't bother us. We could build a
clothes-press in it, and put in a bed-lounge and a dresser and let Anna
have it for her sleeping-room. She needs a place of her own, now that
she's beginning to be dressy.”

“Seems like Thea ought to have the choice of the room, herself,” said
Mrs. Kronborg.

“But, my dear, she don't want it. Won't have it. I sounded her coming
home from church on Sunday; asked her if she would like to sleep in a
new room, if we built on. She fired up like a little wild-cat and said
she'd made her own room all herself, and she didn't think anybody ought
to take it away from her.”

“She don't mean to be impertinent, father. She's made decided that way,
like my father.” Mrs. Kronborg spoke warmly. “I never have any trouble
with the child. I remember my father's ways and go at her carefully.
Thea's all right.”

Mr. Kronborg laughed indulgently and pinched Thor's full cheek. “Oh, I
didn't mean anything against your girl, mother! She's all right, but
she's a little wild-cat, just the same. I think Ray Kennedy's planning
to spoil a born old maid.”

“Huh! She'll get something a good sight better than Ray Kennedy, you
see! Thea's an awful smart girl. I've seen a good many girls take music
lessons in my time, but I ain't seen one that took to it so. Wunsch said
so, too. She's got the making of something in her.”

“I don't deny that, and the sooner she gets at it in a businesslike way,
the better. She's the kind that takes responsibility, and it'll be good
for her.”

Mrs. Kronborg was thoughtful. “In some ways it will, maybe. But there's
a good deal of strain about teaching youngsters, and she's always worked
so hard with the scholars she has. I've often listened to her pounding
it into 'em. I don't want to work her too hard. She's so serious that
she's never had what you might call any real childhood. Seems like she
ought to have the next few years sort of free and easy. She'll be tied
down with responsibilities soon enough.”

Mr. Kronborg patted his wife's arm. “Don't you believe it, mother. Thea
is not the marrying kind. I've watched 'em. Anna will marry before long
and make a good wife, but I don't see Thea bringing up a family. She's
got a good deal of her mother in her, but she hasn't got all. She's too
peppery and too fond of having her own way. Then she's always got to be
ahead in everything. That kind make good church-workers and missionaries
and school teachers, but they don't make good wives. They fret all their
energy away, like colts, and get cut on the wire.”

Mrs. Kronborg laughed. “Give me the graham crackers I put in your pocket
for Thor. He's hungry. You're a funny man, Peter. A body wouldn't think,
to hear you, you was talking about your own daughters. I guess you see
through 'em. Still, even if Thea ain't apt to have children of her own,
I don't know as that's a good reason why she should wear herself out on
other people's.”

“That's just the point, mother. A girl with all that energy has got to
do something, same as a boy, to keep her out of mischief. If you don't
want her to marry Ray, let her do something to make herself
independent.”

“Well, I'm not against it. It might be the best thing for her. I wish I
felt sure she wouldn't worry. She takes things hard. She nearly cried
herself sick about Wunsch's going away. She's the smartest child of 'em
all, Peter, by a long ways.”

Peter Kronborg smiled. “There you go, Anna. That's you all over again.
Now, I have no favorites; they all have their good points. But you,”
 with a twinkle, “always did go in for brains.”

Mrs. Kronborg chuckled as she wiped the cracker crumbs from Thor's chin
and fists. “Well, you're mighty conceited, Peter! But I don't know as I
ever regretted it. I prefer having a family of my own to fussing with
other folks' children, that's the truth.”

Before the Kronborgs reached Copper Hole, Thea's destiny was pretty well
mapped out for her. Mr. Kronborg was always delighted to have an excuse
for enlarging the house.

Mrs. Kronborg was quite right in her conjecture that there would be
unfriendly comment in Moonstone when Thea raised her prices for
music-lessons. People said she was getting too conceited for anything.
Mrs. Livery Johnson put on a new bonnet and paid up all her back calls
to have the pleasure of announcing in each parlor she entered that her
daughters, at least, would “never pay professional prices to Thea
Kronborg.”

Thea raised no objection to quitting school. She was now in the “high
room,” as it was called, in next to the highest class, and was studying
geometry and beginning Caesar. She no longer recited her lessons to the
teacher she liked, but to the Principal, a man who belonged, like Mrs.
Livery Johnson, to the camp of Thea's natural enemies. He taught school
because he was too lazy to work among grown-up people, and he made an
easy job of it. He got out of real work by inventing useless activities
for his pupils, such as the “tree-diagramming system.” Thea had spent
hours making trees out of “Thanatopsis,” Hamlet's soliloquy, Cato on
“Immortality.” She agonized under this waste of time, and was only too
glad to accept her father's offer of liberty.

So Thea left school the first of November. By the first of January she
had eight one-hour pupils and ten half-hour pupils, and there would be
more in the summer. She spent her earnings generously. She bought a new
Brussels carpet for the parlor, and a rifle for Gunner and Axel, and an
imitation tiger-skin coat and cap for Thor. She enjoyed being able to
add to the family possessions, and thought Thor looked quite as handsome
in his spots as the rich children she had seen in Denver. Thor was most
complacent in his conspicuous apparel. He could walk anywhere by this
time--though he always preferred to sit, or to be pulled in his cart. He
was a blissfully lazy child, and had a number of long, dull plays, such
as making nests for his china duck and waiting for her to lay him an
egg. Thea thought him very intelligent, and she was proud that he was so
big and burly. She found him restful, loved to hear him call her
“sitter,” and really liked his companionship, especially when she was
tired. On Saturday, for instance, when she taught from nine in the
morning until five in the afternoon, she liked to get off in a corner
with Thor after supper, away from all the bathing and dressing and
joking and talking that went on in the house, and ask him about his
duck, or hear him tell one of his rambling stories.




XV

By the time Thea's fifteenth birthday came round, she was established as
a music teacher in Moonstone. The new room had been added to the house
early in the spring, and Thea had been giving her lessons there since
the middle of May. She liked the personal independence which was
accorded her as a wage-earner. The family questioned her comings and
goings very little. She could go buggy-riding with Ray Kennedy, for
instance, without taking Gunner or Axel. She could go to Spanish
Johnny's and sing part songs with the Mexicans, and nobody objected.

Thea was still under the first excitement of teaching, and was terribly
in earnest about it. If a pupil did not get on well, she fumed and
fretted. She counted until she was hoarse. She listened to scales in her
sleep. Wunsch had taught only one pupil seriously, but Thea taught
twenty. The duller they were, the more furiously she poked and prodded
them. With the little girls she was nearly always patient, but with
pupils older than herself, she sometimes lost her temper. One of her
mistakes was to let herself in for a calling-down from Mrs. Livery
Johnson. That lady appeared at the Kronborgs' one morning and announced
that she would allow no girl to stamp her foot at her daughter Grace.
She added that Thea's bad manners with the older girls were being talked
about all over town, and that if her temper did not speedily improve she
would lose all her advanced pupils. Thea was frightened. She felt she
could never bear the disgrace, if such a thing happened. Besides, what
would her father say, after he had gone to the expense of building an
addition to the house ? Mrs. Johnson demanded an apology to Grace. Thea
said she was willing to make it. Mrs. Johnson said that hereafter, since
she had taken lessons of the best piano teacher in Grinnell, Iowa, she
herself would decide what pieces Grace should study. Thea readily
consented to that, and Mrs. Johnson rustled away to tell a neighbor
woman that Thea Kronborg could be meek enough when you went at her
right.

Thea was telling Ray about this unpleasant encounter as they were
driving out to the sand hills the next Sunday.

“She was stuffing you, all right, Thee,” Ray reassured her. “There's no
general dissatisfaction among your scholars. She just wanted to get in a
knock. I talked to the piano tuner the last time he was here, and he
said all the people he tuned for expressed themselves very favorably
about your teaching. I wish you didn't take so much pains with them,
myself.”

“But I have to, Ray. They're all so dumb. They've got no ambition,” Thea
exclaimed irritably. “Jenny Smiley is the only one who isn't stupid. She
can read pretty well, and she has such good hands. But she don't care a
rap about it. She has no pride.”

Ray's face was full of complacent satisfaction as he glanced sidewise at
Thea, but she was looking off intently into the mirage, at one of those
mammoth cattle that are nearly always reflected there. “Do you find it
easier to teach in your new room ?” he asked.

“Yes; I'm not interrupted so much. Of course, if I ever happen to want
to practice at night, that's always the night Anna chooses to go to bed
early.”

“It's a darned shame, Thee, you didn't cop that room for yourself. I'm
sore at the PADRE about that. He ought to give you that room. You could
fix it up so pretty.”

“I didn't want it, honest I didn't. Father would have let me have it. I
like my own room better. Somehow I can think better in a little room.
Besides, up there I am away from everybody, and I can read as late as I
please and nobody nags me.”

“A growing girl needs lots of sleep,” Ray providently remarked.

Thea moved restlessly on the buggy cushions. “They need other things
more,” she muttered. “Oh, I forgot. I brought something to show you.
Look here, it came on my birthday. Wasn't it nice of him to remember ?”
 She took from her pocket a postcard, bent in the middle and folded, and
handed it to Ray. On it was a white dove, perched on a wreath of very
blue forget-me-nots, and “Birthday Greetings” in gold letters. Under
this was written, “From A. Wunsch.”

Ray turned the card over, examined the postmark, and then began to
laugh.

“Concord, Kansas. He has my sympathy!”

“Why, is that a poor town ?”

“It's the jumping-off place, no town at all. Some houses dumped down in
the middle of a cornfield. You get lost in the corn. Not even a saloon
to keep things going; sell whiskey without a license at the butcher
shop, beer on ice with the liver and beefsteak. I wouldn't stay there
over Sunday for a ten-dollar bill.”

“Oh, dear! What do you suppose he's doing there ? Maybe he just stopped
off there a few days to tune pianos,” Thea suggested hopefully.

Ray gave her back the card. “He's headed in the wrong direction. What
does he want to get back into a grass country for ? Now, there are lots
of good live towns down on the Santa Fe, and everybody down there is
musical. He could always get a job playing in saloons if he was
dead broke. I've figured out that I've got no years of my life to waste
in a Methodist country where they raise pork.”

“We must stop on our way back and show this card to Mrs. Kohler. She
misses him so.”

“By the way, Thee, I hear the old woman goes to church every Sunday to
hear you sing. Fritz tells me he has to wait till two o'clock for his
Sunday dinner these days. The church people ought to give you credit for
that, when they go for you.”

Thea shook her head and spoke in a tone of resignation. “They'll always
go for me, just as they did for Wunsch. It wasn't because he drank they
went for him; not really. It was something else.”

“You want to salt your money down, Thee, and go to Chicago and take some
lessons. Then you come back, and wear a long feather and high heels and
put on a few airs, and that'll fix 'em. That's what they like.”

“I'll never have money enough to go to Chicago. Mother meant to lend me
some, I think, but now they've got hard times back in Nebraska, and her
farm don't bring her in anything. Takes all the tenant can raise to pay
the taxes. Don't let's talk about that. You promised to tell me about
the play you went to see in Denver.”

Any one would have liked to hear Ray's simple and clear account of the
performance he had seen at the Tabor Grand Opera House--Maggie Mitchell
in LITTLE BAREFOOT--and any one would have liked to watch his kind face.
Ray looked his best out of doors, when his thick red hands were covered
by gloves, and the dull red of his sunburned face somehow seemed right
in the light and wind. He looked better, too, with his hat on; his hair
was thin and dry, with no particular color or character, “regular
Willy-boy hair,” as he himself described it. His eyes were pale beside
the reddish bronze of his skin. They had the faded look often seen in
the eyes of men who have lived much in the sun and wind and who have
been accustomed to train their vision upon distant objects.

Ray realized that Thea's life was dull and exacting, and that she missed
Wunsch. He knew she worked hard, that she put up with a great many
little annoyances, and that her duties as a teacher separated her more
than ever from the boys and girls of her own age. He did everything he
could to provide recreation for her. He brought her candy and magazines
and pineapples--of which she was very fond--from Denver, and kept his
eyes and ears open for anything that might interest her. He was, of
course, living for Thea. He had thought it all out carefully and had
made up his mind just when he would speak to her. When she was
seventeen, then he would tell her his plan and ask her to marry him. He
would be willing to wait two, or even three years, until she was twenty,
if she thought best. By that time he would surely have got in on
something: copper, oil, gold, silver, sheep,--something.

Meanwhile, it was pleasure enough to feel that she depended on him more
and more, that she leaned upon his steady kindness. He never broke faith
with himself about her; he never hinted to her of his hopes for the
future, never suggested that she might be more intimately confidential
with him, or talked to her of the thing he thought about so constantly.
He had the chivalry which is perhaps the proudest possession of his
race. He had never embarrassed her by so much as a glance. Sometimes,
when they drove out to the sand hills, he let his left arm lie along the
back of the buggy seat, but it never came any nearer to Thea than that,
never touched her. He often turned to her a face full of pride, and
frank admiration, but his glance was never so intimate or so penetrating
as Dr. Archie's. His blue eyes were clear and shallow, friendly,
uninquiring. He rested Thea because he was so different; because, though
he often told her interesting things, he never set lively fancies going
in her head; because he never misunderstood her, and because he never,
by any chance, for a single instant, understood her! Yes, with Ray she
was safe; by him she would never be discovered!




XVI

The pleasantest experience Thea had that summer was a trip that she and
her mother made to Denver in Ray Kennedy's caboose. Mrs. Kronborg had
been looking forward to this excursion for a long while, but as Ray
never knew at what hour his freight would leave Moonstone, it was
difficult to arrange. The call-boy was as likely to summon him to start
on his run at twelve o'clock midnight as at twelve o'clock noon. The
first week in June started out with all the scheduled trains running on
time, and a light freight business. Tuesday evening Ray, after
consulting with the dispatcher, stopped at the Kronborgs' front gate to
tell Mrs. Kronborg--who was helping Tillie water the flowers--that if
she and Thea could be at the depot at eight o'clock the next morning, he
thought he could promise them a pleasant ride and get them into Denver
before nine o'clock in the evening. Mrs. Kronborg told him cheerfully,
across the fence, that she would “take him up on it,” and Ray hurried
back to the yards to scrub out his car.

The one complaint Ray's brakemen had to make of him was that he was too
fussy about his caboose. His former brakeman had asked to be transferred
because, he said, “Kennedy was as fussy about his car as an old maid
about her bird-cage.” Joe Giddy, who was braking with Ray now, called
him “the bride,” because he kept the caboose and bunks so clean.

It was properly the brakeman's business to keep the car clean, but when
Ray got back to the depot, Giddy was nowhere to be found. Muttering that
all his brakemen seemed to consider him “easy,” Ray went down to his car
alone. He built a fire in the stove and put water on to heat while he
got into his overalls and jumper. Then he set to work with a
scrubbing-brush and plenty of soap and “cleaner.” He scrubbed the floor
and seats, blacked the stove, put clean sheets on the bunks, and then
began to demolish Giddy's picture gallery. Ray found that his brakemen
were likely to have what he termed “a taste for the nude in art,” and
Giddy was no exception. Ray took down half a dozen girls in tights and
ballet skirts,--premiums for cigarette coupons,--and some racy calendars
advertising saloons and sporting clubs, which had cost Giddy both time
and trouble; he even removed Giddy's particular pet, a naked girl lying
on a couch with her knee carelessly poised in the air. Underneath the
picture was printed the title, “The Odalisque.” Giddy was under the
happy delusion that this title meant something wicked,--there was a
wicked look about the consonants,--but Ray, of course, had looked it up,
and Giddy was indebted to the dictionary for the privilege of keeping
his lady. If “odalisque” had been what Ray called an objectionable word,
he would have thrown the picture out in the first place. Ray even took
down a picture of Mrs. Langtry in evening dress, because it was entitled
the “Jersey Lily,” and because there was a small head of Edward VII,
then Prince of Wales, in one corner. Albert Edward's conduct was a
popular subject of discussion among railroad men in those days, and as
Ray pulled the tacks out of this lithograph he felt more indignant with
the English than ever. He deposited all these pictures under the
mattress of Giddy's bunk, and stood admiring his clean car in the
lamplight; the walls now exhibited only a wheatfield, advertising
agricultural implements, a map of Colorado, and some pictures of
race-horses and hunting-dogs. At this moment Giddy, freshly shaved and
shampooed, his shirt shining with the highest polish known to Chinese
laundrymen, his straw hat tipped over his right eye, thrust his head in
at the door.

“What in hell--” he brought out furiously. His good humored, sunburned
face seemed fairly to swell with amazement and anger.

“That's all right, Giddy,” Ray called in a conciliatory tone. “Nothing
injured. I'll put 'em all up again as I found 'em. Going to take some
ladies down in the car to-morrow.”

Giddy scowled. He did not dispute the propriety of Ray's measures, if
there were to be ladies on board, but he felt injured. “I suppose you'll
expect me to behave like a Y.M.C.A. secretary,” he growled. “I can't do
my work and serve tea at the same time.”

“No need to have a tea-party,” said Ray with determined cheerfulness.
“Mrs. Kronborg will bring the lunch, and it will be a darned good one.”

Giddy lounged against the car, holding his cigar between two thick
fingers. “Then I guess she'll get it,” he observed knowingly. “I don't
think your musical friend is much on the grub-box. Has to keep her hands
white to tickle the ivories.” Giddy had nothing against Thea, but he
felt cantankerous and wanted to get a rise out of Kennedy.

“Every man to his own job,” Ray replied agreeably, pulling his white
shirt on over his head.

Giddy emitted smoke disdainfully. “I suppose so. The man that gets her
will have to wear an apron and bake the pancakes. Well, some men like to
mess about the kitchen.” He paused, but Ray was intent on getting into
his clothes as quickly as possible. Giddy thought he could go a little
further. “Of course, I don't dispute your right to haul women in this
car if you want to; but personally, so far as I'm concerned, I'd a good
deal rather drink a can of tomatoes and do without the women AND their
lunch. I was never much enslaved to hard-boiled eggs, anyhow.”

“You'll eat 'em to-morrow, all the same.” Ray's tone had a steely
glitter as he jumped out of the car, and Giddy stood aside to let him
pass. He knew that Kennedy's next reply would be delivered by hand. He
had once seen Ray beat up a nasty fellow for insulting a Mexican woman
who helped about the grub-car in the work train, and his fists had
worked like two steel hammers. Giddy wasn't looking for trouble.

At eight o'clock the next morning Ray greeted his ladies and helped them
into the car. Giddy had put on a clean shirt and yellow pig-skin gloves
and was whistling his best. He considered Kennedy a fluke as a ladies'
man, and if there was to be a party, the honors had to be done by some
one who wasn't a blacksmith at small-talk. Giddy had, as Ray
sarcastically admitted, “a local reputation as a jollier,” and he was
fluent in gallant speeches of a not too-veiled nature. He insisted that
Thea should take his seat in the cupola, opposite Ray's, where she could
look out over the country. Thea told him, as she clambered up, that she
cared a good deal more about riding in that seat than about going to
Denver. Ray was never so companionable and easy as when he sat chatting
in the lookout of his little house on wheels. Good stories came to him,
and interesting recollections. Thea had a great respect for the reports
he had to write out, and for the telegrams that were handed to him at
stations; for all the knowledge and experience it must take to run a
freight train.

Giddy, down in the car, in the pauses of his work, made himself
agreeable to Mrs. Kronborg.

“It's a great rest to be where my family can't get at me, Mr. Giddy,”
 she told him. “I thought you and Ray might have some housework here for
me to look after, but I couldn't improve any on this car.”

“Oh, we like to keep her neat,” returned Giddy glibly, winking up at
Ray's expressive back. “If you want to see a clean ice-box, look at this
one. Yes, Kennedy always carries fresh cream to eat on his oatmeal. I'm
not particular. The tin cow's good enough for me.”

“Most of you boys smoke so much that all victuals taste alike to you,”
 said Mrs. Kronborg. “I've got no religious scruples against smoking, but
I couldn't take as much interest cooking for a man that used tobacco. I
guess it's all right for bachelors who have to eat round.”

Mrs. Kronborg took off her hat and veil and made herself comfortable.
She seldom had an opportunity to be idle, and she enjoyed it. She could
sit for hours and watch the sage-hens fly up and the jack-rabbits dart
away from the track, without being bored. She wore a tan bombazine
dress, made very plainly, and carried a roomy, worn, mother-of-the-family
handbag.

Ray Kennedy always insisted that Mrs. Kronborg was “a fine-looking
lady,” but this was not the common opinion in Moonstone. Ray had lived
long enough among the Mexicans to dislike fussiness, to feel that there
was something more attractive in ease of manner than in absentminded
concern about hairpins and dabs of lace. He had learned to think that
the way a woman stood, moved, sat in her chair, looked at you, was more
important than the absence of wrinkles from her skirt. Ray had, indeed,
such unusual perceptions in some directions, that one could not help
wondering what he would have been if he had ever, as he said, had “half
a chance.”

He was right; Mrs. Kronborg was a fine-looking woman. She was short and
square, but her head was a real head, not a mere jerky termination of
the body. It had some individuality apart from hats and hairpins. Her
hair, Moonstone women admitted, would have been very pretty “on anybody
else.” Frizzy bangs were worn then, but Mrs. Kronborg always dressed her
hair in the same way, parted in the middle, brushed smoothly back from
her low, white forehead, pinned loosely on the back of her head in two
thick braids. It was growing gray about the temples, but after the
manner of yellow hair it seemed only to have grown paler there, and had
taken on a color like that of English primroses. Her eyes were clear and
untroubled; her face smooth and calm, and, as Ray said, “strong.”

Thea and Ray, up in the sunny cupola, were laughing and talking. Ray got
great pleasure out of seeing her face there in the little box where he
so often imagined it. They were crossing a plateau where great red
sandstone boulders lay about, most of them much wider at the top than at
the base, so that they looked like great toadstools.

“The sand has been blowing against them for a good many hundred years,”
 Ray explained, directing Thea's eyes with his gloved hand. “You see the
sand blows low, being so heavy, and cuts them out underneath. Wind and
sand are pretty high-class architects. That's the principle of most of
the Cliff-Dweller remains down at Canyon de Chelly. The sandstorms had
dug out big depressions in the face of a cliff, and the Indians built
their houses back in that depression.”

“You told me that before, Ray, and of course you know. But the geography
says their houses were cut out of the face of the living rock, and I
like that better.”

Ray sniffed. “What nonsense does get printed! It's enough to give a man
disrespect for learning. How could them Indians cut houses out of the
living rock, when they knew nothing about the art of forging metals ?”
 Ray leaned back in his chair, swung his foot, and looked thoughtful and
happy. He was in one of his favorite fields of speculation, and nothing
gave him more pleasure than talking these things over with Thea
Kronborg. “I'll tell you, Thee, if those old fellows had learned to work
metals once, your ancient Egyptians and Assyrians wouldn't have beat
them very much. Whatever they did do, they did well. Their masonry's
standing there to-day, the corners as true as the Denver Capitol. They
were clever at most everything but metals; and that one failure kept
them from getting across. It was the quicksand that swallowed 'em up, as
a race. I guess civilization proper began when men mastered metals.”

Ray was not vain about his bookish phrases. He did not use them to show
off, but because they seemed to him more adequate than colloquial
speech. He felt strongly about these things, and groped for words, as he
said, “to express himself.” He had the lamentable American belief that
“expression” is obligatory. He still carried in his trunk, among the
unrelated possessions of a railroad man, a notebook on the title-page of
which was written “Impressions on First Viewing the Grand Canyon, Ray H.
Kennedy.” The pages of that book were like a battlefield; the laboring
author had fallen back from metaphor after metaphor, abandoned position
after position. He would have admitted that the art of forging metals
was nothing to this treacherous business of recording impressions, in
which the material you were so full of vanished mysteriously under your
striving hand. “Escaping steam!” he had said to himself, the last time
he tried to read that notebook.

Thea didn't mind Ray's travel-lecture expressions. She dodged them,
unconsciously, as she did her father's professional palaver. The light
in Ray's pale-blue eyes and the feeling in his voice more than made up
for the stiffness of his language.

“Were the Cliff-Dwellers really clever with their hands, Ray, or do you
always have to make allowance and say, 'That was pretty good for an
Indian' ?” she asked.

Ray went down into the car to give some instructions to Giddy. “Well,”
 he said when he returned, “about the aborigines: once or twice I've been
with some fellows who were cracking burial mounds. Always felt a little
ashamed of it, but we did pull out some remarkable things. We got some
pottery out whole; seemed pretty fine to me. I guess their women were
their artists. We found lots of old shoes and sandals made out of yucca
fiber, neat and strong; and feather blankets, too.”

“Feather blankets ? You never told me about them.”

“Didn't I ? The old fellows--or the squaws--wove a close netting of yucca
fiber, and then tied on little bunches of down feathers, overlapping,
just the way feathers grow on a bird. Some of them were feathered on
both sides. You can't get anything warmer than that, now, can you ?--or
prettier. What I like about those old aborigines is, that they got all
their ideas from nature.”

Thea laughed. “That means you're going to say something about girls'
wearing corsets. But some of your Indians flattened their babies' heads,
and that's worse than wearing corsets.”

“Give me an Indian girl's figure for beauty,” Ray insisted. “And a girl
with a voice like yours ought to have plenty of lung-action. But you
know my sentiments on that subject. I was going to tell you about the
handsomest thing we ever looted out of those burial mounds. It was on a
woman, too, I regret to say. She was preserved as perfect as any mummy
that ever came out of the pyramids. She had a big string of turquoises
around her neck, and she was wrapped in a fox-fur cloak, lined with
little yellow feathers that must have come off wild canaries. Can you
beat that, now ? The fellow that claimed it sold it to a Boston man for a
hundred and fifty dollars.”

Thea looked at him admiringly. “Oh, Ray, and didn't you get anything off
her, to remember her by, even ? She must have been a princess.”

Ray took a wallet from the pocket of the coat that was hanging beside
him, and drew from it a little lump wrapped in worn tissue paper. In a
moment a stone, soft and blue as a robin's egg, lay in the hard palm of
his hand. It was a turquoise, rubbed smooth in the Indian finish, which
is so much more beautiful than the incongruous high polish the white man
gives that tender stone. “I got this from her necklace. See the hole
where the string went through ? You know how the Indians drill them ? Work
the drill with their teeth. You like it, don't you ? They're just right
for you. Blue and yellow are the Swedish colors.” Ray looked intently at
her head, bent over his hand, and then gave his whole attention to the
track.

“I'll tell you, Thee,” he began after a pause, “I'm going to form a
camping party one of these days and persuade your PADRE to take you and
your mother down to that country, and we'll live in the rock
houses--they're as comfortable as can be--and start the cook fires up in
'em once again. I'll go into the burial mounds and get you more
keepsakes than any girl ever had before.” Ray had planned such an
expedition for his wedding journey, and it made his heart thump to see
how Thea's eyes kindled when he talked about it. “I've learned more down
there about what makes history,” he went on, “than in all the books I've
ever read. When you sit in the sun and let your heels hang out of a
doorway that drops a thousand feet, ideas come to you. You begin to feel
what the human race has been up against from the beginning. There's
something mighty elevating about those old habitations. You feel like
it's up to you to do your best, on account of those fellows having it so
hard. You feel like you owed them something.”

At Wassiwappa, Ray got instructions to sidetrack until Thirty-six went
by. After reading the message, he turned to his guests. “I'm afraid this
will hold us up about two hours, Mrs. Kronborg, and we won't get into
Denver till near midnight.”

“That won't trouble me,” said Mrs. Kronborg contentedly. “They know me
at the Y.W.C.A., and they'll let me in any time of night. I came to see
the country, not to make time. I've always wanted to get out at this
white place and look around, and now I'll have a chance. What makes it
so white ?”

“Some kind of chalky rock.” Ray sprang to the ground and gave Mrs.
Kronborg his hand. “You can get soil of any color in Colorado; match
most any ribbon.”

While Ray was getting his train on to a side track, Mrs. Kronborg
strolled off to examine the post-office and station house; these, with
the water tank, made up the town. The station agent “batched” and raised
chickens. He ran out to meet Mrs. Kronborg, clutched at her feverishly,
and began telling her at once how lonely he was and what bad luck he was
having with his poultry. She went to his chicken yard with him, and
prescribed for gapes.

Wassiwappa seemed a dreary place enough to people who looked for
verdure, a brilliant place to people who liked color. Beside the station
house there was a blue-grass plot, protected by a red plank fence, and
six fly-bitten box-elder trees, not much larger than bushes, were kept
alive by frequent hosings from the water plug. Over the windows some
dusty morning-glory vines were trained on strings. All the country about
was broken up into low chalky hills, which were so intensely white, and
spotted so evenly with sage, that they looked like white leopards
crouching. White dust powdered everything, and the light was so intense
that the station agent usually wore blue glasses. Behind the station
there was a water course, which roared in flood time, and a basin in the
soft white rock where a pool of alkali water flashed in the sun like a
mirror. The agent looked almost as sick as his chickens, and Mrs.
Kronborg at once invited him to lunch with her party. He had, he
confessed, a distaste for his own cooking, and lived mainly on soda
crackers and canned beef. He laughed apologetically when Mrs. Kronborg
said she guessed she'd look about for a shady place to eat lunch.

She walked up the track to the water tank, and there, in the narrow
shadows cast by the uprights on which the tank stood, she found two
tramps. They sat up and stared at her, heavy with sleep. When she asked
them where they were going, they told her “to the coast.” They rested by
day and traveled by night; walked the ties unless they could steal a
ride, they said; adding that “these Western roads were getting strict.”
 Their faces were blistered, their eyes blood-shot, and their shoes
looked fit only for the trash pile.

“I suppose you're hungry ?” Mrs. Kronborg asked. “I suppose you both
drink ?” she went on thoughtfully, not censoriously.

The huskier of the two hoboes, a bushy, bearded fellow, rolled his eyes
and said, “I wonder ?” But the other, who was old and spare, with a sharp
nose and watery eyes, sighed. “Some has one affliction, some another,”
 he said.

Mrs. Kronborg reflected. “Well,” she said at last, “you can't get liquor
here, anyway. I am going to ask you to vacate, because I want to have a
little picnic under this tank for the freight crew that brought me
along. I wish I had lunch enough to provide you, but I ain't. The
station agent says he gets his provisions over there at the post office
store, and if you are hungry you can get some canned stuff there.” She
opened her handbag and gave each of the tramps a half-dollar.

The old man wiped his eyes with his forefinger. “Thank 'ee, ma'am. A can
of tomatters will taste pretty good to me. I wasn't always walkin' ties;
I had a good job in Cleveland before--”

The hairy tramp turned on him fiercely. “Aw, shut up on that, grandpaw!
Ain't you got no gratitude ? What do you want to hand the lady that fur ?”

The old man hung his head and turned away. As he went off, his comrade
looked after him and said to Mrs. Kronborg: “It's true, what he says. He
had a job in the car shops; but he had bad luck.” They both limped away
toward the store, and Mrs. Kronborg sighed. She was not afraid of
tramps. She always talked to them, and never turned one away. She hated
to think how many of them there were, crawling along the tracks over
that vast country.

Her reflections were cut short by Ray and Giddy and Thea, who came
bringing the lunch box and water bottles. Although there was not shadow
enough to accommodate all the party at once, the air under the tank was
distinctly cooler than the surrounding air, and the drip made a pleasant
sound in that breathless noon. The station agent ate as if he had never
been fed before, apologizing every time he took another piece of fried
chicken. Giddy was unabashed before the devilled eggs of which he had
spoken so scornfully last night. After lunch the men lit their pipes and
lay back against the uprights that supported the tank.

“This is the sunny side of railroading, all right,” Giddy drawled
luxuriously.

“You fellows grumble too much,” said Mrs. Kronborg as she corked the
pickle jar. “Your job has its drawbacks, but it don't tie you down. Of
course there's the risk; but I believe a man's watched over, and he
can't be hurt on the railroad or anywhere else if it's intended he
shouldn't be.”

Giddy laughed. “Then the trains must be operated by fellows the Lord has
it in for, Mrs. Kronborg. They figure it out that a railroad man's only
due to last eleven years; then it's his turn to be smashed.”

“That's a dark Providence, I don't deny,” Mrs. Kronborg admitted. “But
there's lots of things in life that's hard to understand.”

“I guess!” murmured Giddy, looking off at the spotted white hills.

Ray smoked in silence, watching Thea and her mother clear away the
lunch. He was thinking that Mrs. Kronborg had in her face the same
serious look that Thea had; only hers was calm and satisfied, and Thea's
was intense and questioning. But in both it was a large kind of look,
that was not all the time being broken up and convulsed by trivial
things. They both carried their heads like Indian women, with a kind of
noble unconsciousness. He got so tired of women who were always nodding
and jerking; apologizing, deprecating, coaxing, insinuating with their
heads.

When Ray's party set off again that afternoon the sun beat fiercely into
the cupola, and Thea curled up in one of the seats at the back of the
car and had a nap.

As the short twilight came on, Giddy took a turn in the cupola, and Ray
came down and sat with Thea on the rear platform of the caboose and
watched the darkness come in soft waves over the plain. They were now
about thirty miles from Denver, and the mountains looked very near. The
great toothed wall behind which the sun had gone down now separated into
four distinct ranges, one behind the other. They were a very pale blue,
a color scarcely stronger than wood smoke, and the sunset had left
bright streaks in the snow-filled gorges. In the clear, yellow-streaked
sky the stars were coming out, flickering like newly lighted lamps,
growing steadier and more golden as the sky darkened and the land
beneath them fell into complete shadow. It was a cool, restful darkness
that was not black or forbidding, but somehow open and free; the night
of high plains where there is no moistness or mistiness in the
atmosphere.

Ray lit his pipe. “I never get tired of them old stars, Thee. I miss 'em
up in Washington and Oregon where it's misty. Like 'em best down in
Mother Mexico, where they have everything their own way. I'm not for any
country where the stars are dim.” Ray paused and drew on his pipe. “I
don't know as I ever really noticed 'em much till that first year I
herded sheep up in Wyoming. That was the year the blizzard caught me.”

“And you lost all your sheep, didn't you, Ray ?” Thea spoke
sympathetically. “Was the man who owned them nice about it ?”

“Yes, he was a good loser. But I didn't get over it for a long while.
Sheep are so damned resigned. Sometimes, to this day, when I'm
dog-tired, I try to save them sheep all night long. It comes kind of
hard on a boy when he first finds out how little he is, and how big
everything else is.”

Thea moved restlessly toward him and dropped her chin on her hand,
looking at a low star that seemed to rest just on the rim of the earth.
“I don't see how you stood it. I don't believe I could. I don't see how
people can stand it to get knocked out, anyhow!” She spoke with such
fierceness that Ray glanced at her in surprise. She was sitting on the
floor of the car, crouching like a little animal about to spring.

“No occasion for you to see,” he said warmly. “There'll always be plenty
of other people to take the knocks for you.”

“That's nonsense, Ray.” Thea spoke impatiently and leaned lower still,
frowning at the red star. “Everybody's up against it for himself,
succeeds or fails--himself.”

“In one way, yes,” Ray admitted, knocking the sparks from his pipe out
into the soft darkness that seemed to flow like a river beside the car.
“But when you look at it another way, there are a lot of halfway people
in this world who help the winners win, and the failers fail. If a man
stumbles, there's plenty of people to push him down. But if he's like
'the youth who bore,' those same people are foreordained to help him
along. They may hate to, worse than blazes, and they may do a lot of
cussin' about it, but they have to help the winners and they can't dodge
it. It's a natural law, like what keeps the big clock up there going,
little wheels and big, and no mix-up.” Ray's hand and his pipe were
suddenly outlined against the sky. “Ever occur to you, Thee, that they
have to be on time close enough to MAKE TIME ? The Dispatcher up there
must have a long head.” Pleased with his similitude, Ray went back to
the lookout. Going into Denver, he had to keep a sharp watch.

Giddy came down, cheerful at the prospect of getting into port, and
singing a new topical ditty that had come up from the Santa Fe by way of
La Junta. Nobody knows who makes these songs; they seem to follow events
automatically. Mrs. Kronborg made Giddy sing the whole twelve verses of
this one, and laughed until she wiped her eyes. The story was that of
Katie Casey, head diningroom girl at Winslow, Arizona, who was unjustly
discharged by the Harvey House manager. Her suitor, the yardmaster, took
the switchmen out on a strike until she was reinstated. Freight trains
from the east and the west piled up at Winslow until the yards looked
like a log-jam. The division superintendent, who was in California, had
to wire instructions for Katie Casey's restoration before he could get
his trains running. Giddy's song told all this with much detail, both
tender and technical, and after each of the dozen verses came the
refrain:--


     “Oh, who would think that Katie Casey owned the Santa Fe ?
     But it really looks that way,
     The dispatcher's turnin' gray,
     All the crews is off their pay;
     She can hold the freight from Albuquerq' to Needles any day;
     The division superintendent, he come home from Monterey,
     Just to see if things was pleasin' Katie Ca--a--a--sey.”


Thea laughed with her mother and applauded Giddy. Everything was so
kindly and comfortable; Giddy and Ray, and their hospitable little
house, and the easy-going country, and the stars.  She curled up on the
seat again with that warm, sleepy feeling of the friendliness of the
world--which nobody keeps very long, and which she was to lose early and
irrevocably.




XVII

The summer flew by. Thea was glad when Ray Kennedy had a Sunday in town
and could take her driving. Out among the sand hills she could forget
the “new room” which was the scene of wearing and fruitless labor. Dr.
Archie was away from home a good deal that year. He had put all his
money into mines above Colorado Springs, and he hoped for great returns
from them.

In the fall of that year, Mr. Kronborg decided that Thea ought to show
more interest in church work. He put it to her frankly, one night at
supper, before the whole family. “How can I insist on the other girls in
the congregation being active in the work, when one of my own daughters
manifests so little interest ?”

“But I sing every Sunday morning, and I have to give up one night a week
to choir practice,” Thea declared rebelliously, pushing back her plate
with an angry determination to eat nothing more.

“One night a week is not enough for the pastor's daughter,” her father
replied. “You won't do anything in the sewing society, and you won't
take part in the Christian Endeavor or the Band of Hope. Very well, you
must make it up in other ways. I want some one to play the organ and
lead the singing at prayer-meeting this winter. Deacon Potter told me
some time ago that he thought there would be more interest in our
prayer-meetings if we had the organ. Miss Meyers don't feel that she can
play on Wednesday nights. And there ought to be somebody to start the
hymns. Mrs. Potter is getting old, and she always starts them too high.
It won't take much of your time, and it will keep people from talking.”

This argument conquered Thea, though she left the table sullenly. The
fear of the tongue, that terror of little towns, is usually felt more
keenly by the minister's family than by other households. Whenever the
Kronborgs wanted to do anything, even to buy a new carpet, they had to
take counsel together as to whether people would talk. Mrs. Kronborg had
her own conviction that people talked when they felt like it, and said
what they chose, no matter how the minister's family conducted
themselves. But she did not impart these dangerous ideas to her
children. Thea was still under the belief that public opinion could be
placated; that if you clucked often enough, the hens would mistake you
for one of themselves.

Mrs. Kronborg did not have any particular zest for prayer-meetings, and
she stayed at home whenever she had a valid excuse. Thor was too old to
furnish such an excuse now, so every Wednesday night, unless one of the
children was sick, she trudged off with Thea, behind Mr. Kronborg. At
first Thea was terribly bored. But she got used to prayer-meeting, got
even to feel a mournful interest in it.

The exercises were always pretty much the same. After the first hymn her
father read a passage from the Bible, usually a Psalm. Then there was
another hymn, and then her father commented upon the passage he had read
and, as he said, “applied the Word to our necessities.” After a third
hymn, the meeting was declared open, and the old men and women took
turns at praying and talking. Mrs. Kronborg never spoke in meeting. She
told people firmly that she had been brought up to keep silent and let
the men talk, but she gave respectful attention to the others, sitting
with her hands folded in her lap.

The prayer-meeting audience was always small. The young and energetic
members of the congregation came only once or twice a year, “to keep
people from talking.” The usual Wednesday night gathering was made up of
old women, with perhaps six or eight old men, and a few sickly girls who
had not much interest in life; two of them, indeed, were already
preparing to die. Thea accepted the mournfulness of the prayer-meetings
as a kind of spiritual discipline, like funerals. She always read late
after she went home and felt a stronger wish than usual to live and to
be happy.

The meetings were conducted in the Sunday-School room, where there were
wooden chairs instead of pews; an old map of Palestine hung on the wall,
and the bracket lamps gave out only a dim light. The old women sat
motionless as Indians in their shawls and bonnets; some of them wore
long black mourning veils. The old men drooped in their chairs. Every
back, every face, every head said “resignation.” Often there were long
silences, when you could hear nothing but the crackling of the soft coal
in the stove and the muffled cough of one of the sick girls.

There was one nice old lady,--tall, erect, self-respecting, with a
delicate white face and a soft voice. She never whined, and what she
said was always cheerful, though she spoke so nervously that Thea knew
she dreaded getting up, and that she made a real sacrifice to, as she
said, “testify to the goodness of her Saviour.” She was the mother of
the girl who coughed, and Thea used to wonder how she explained things
to herself. There was, indeed, only one woman who talked because she
was, as Mr. Kronborg said, “tonguey.” The others were somehow
impressive. They told about the sweet thoughts that came to them while
they were at their work; how, amid their household tasks, they were
suddenly lifted by the sense of a divine Presence. Sometimes they told
of their first conversion, of how in their youth that higher Power had
made itself known to them. Old Mr. Carsen, the carpenter, who gave his
services as janitor to the church, used often to tell how, when he was a
young man and a scoffer, bent on the destruction of both body and soul,
his Saviour had come to him in the Michigan woods and had stood, it
seemed to him, beside the tree he was felling; and how he dropped his
axe and knelt in prayer “to Him who died for us upon the tree.” Thea
always wanted to ask him more about it; about his mysterious wickedness,
and about the vision.

Sometimes the old people would ask for prayers for their absent
children. Sometimes they asked their brothers and sisters in Christ to
pray that they might be stronger against temptations. One of the sick
girls used to ask them to pray that she might have more faith in the
times of depression that came to her, “when all the way before seemed
dark.” She repeated that husky phrase so often, that Thea always
remembered it.

One old woman, who never missed a Wednesday night, and who nearly always
took part in the meeting, came all the way up from the depot settlement.
She always wore a black crocheted “fascinator” over her thin white hair,
and she made long, tremulous prayers, full of railroad terminology. She
had six sons in the service of different railroads, and she always
prayed “for the boys on the road, who know not at what moment they may
be cut off. When, in Thy divine wisdom, their hour is upon them, may
they, O our Heavenly Father, see only white lights along the road to
Eternity.” She used to speak, too, of “the engines that race with
death”; and though she looked so old and little when she was on her
knees, and her voice was so shaky, her prayers had a thrill of speed and
danger in them; they made one think of the deep black canyons, the
slender trestles, the pounding trains. Thea liked to look at her sunken
eyes that seemed full of wisdom, at her black thread gloves, much too
long in the fingers and so meekly folded one over the other. Her face
was brown, and worn away as rocks are worn by water. There are many ways
of describing that color of age, but in reality it is not like
parchment, or like any of the things it is said to be like. That
brownness and that texture of skin are found only in the faces of old
human creatures, who have worked hard and who have always been poor.

One bitterly cold night in December the prayer-meeting seemed to Thea
longer than usual. The prayers and the talks went on and on. It was as
if the old people were afraid to go out into the cold, or were stupefied
by the hot air of the room. She had left a book at home that she was
impatient to get back to. At last the Doxology was sung, but the old
people lingered about the stove to greet each other, and Thea took her
mother's arm and hurried out to the frozen sidewalk, before her father
could get away. The wind was whistling up the street and whipping the
naked cottonwood trees against the telegraph poles and the sides of the
houses. Thin snow clouds were flying overhead, so that the sky looked
gray, with a dull phosphorescence. The icy streets and the shingle roofs
of the houses were gray, too. All along the street, shutters banged or
windows rattled, or gates wobbled, held by their latch but shaking on
loose hinges. There was not a cat or a dog in Moonstone that night that
was not given a warm shelter; the cats under the kitchen stove, the dogs
in barns or coal-sheds. When Thea and her mother reached home, their
mufflers were covered with ice, where their breath had frozen. They
hurried into the house and made a dash for the parlor and the hard-coal
burner, behind which Gunner was sitting on a stool, reading his Jules
Verne book. The door stood open into the dining-room, which was heated
from the parlor. Mr. Kronborg always had a lunch when he came home from
prayer-meeting, and his pumpkin pie and milk were set out on the
dining-table. Mrs. Kronborg said she thought she felt hungry, too, and
asked Thea if she didn't want something to eat.

“No, I'm not hungry, mother. I guess I'll go upstairs.”

“I expect you've got some book up there,” said Mrs. Kronborg, bringing
out another pie. “You'd better bring it down here and read. Nobody'll
disturb you, and it's terrible cold up in that loft.”

Thea was always assured that no one would disturb her if she read
downstairs, but the boys talked when they came in, and her father fairly
delivered discourses after he had been renewed by half a pie and a
pitcher of milk.

“I don't mind the cold. I'll take a hot brick up for my feet. I put one
in the stove before I left, if one of the boys hasn't stolen it.
Good-night, mother.” Thea got her brick and lantern, and dashed upstairs
through the windy loft. She undressed at top speed and got into bed with
her brick. She put a pair of white knitted gloves on her hands, and
pinned over her head a piece of soft flannel that had been one of Thor's
long petticoats when he was a baby. Thus equipped, she was ready for
business. She took from her table a thick paper-backed volume, one of
the “line” of paper novels the druggist kept to sell to traveling men.
She had bought it, only yesterday, because the first sentence interested
her very much, and because she saw, as she glanced over the pages, the
magical names of two Russian cities. The book was a poor translation of
“Anna Karenina.” Thea opened it at a mark, and fixed her eyes intently
upon the small print. The hymns, the sick girl, the resigned black
figures were forgotten. It was the night of the ball in Moscow.

Thea would have been astonished if she could have known how, years
afterward, when she had need of them, those old faces were to come back
to her, long after they were hidden away under the earth; that they
would seem to her then as full of meaning, as mysteriously marked by
Destiny, as the people who danced the mazurka under the elegant
Korsunsky.




XVIII

Mr. Kronborg was too fond of his ease and too sensible to worry his
children much about religion. He was more sincere than many preachers,
but when he spoke to his family about matters of conduct it was usually
with a regard for keeping up appearances. The church and church work
were discussed in the family like the routine of any other business.
Sunday was the hard day of the week with them, just as Saturday was the
busy day with the merchants on Main Street. Revivals were seasons of
extra work and pressure, just as threshing-time was on the farms.
Visiting elders had to be lodged and cooked for, the folding-bed in the
parlor was let down, and Mrs. Kronborg had to work in the kitchen all
day long and attend the night meetings.

During one of these revivals Thea's sister Anna professed religion with,
as Mrs. Kronborg said, “a good deal of fluster.” While Anna was going up
to the mourners' bench nightly and asking for the prayers of the
congregation, she disseminated general gloom throughout the household,
and after she joined the church she took on an air of “set-apartness”
 that was extremely trying to her brothers and her sister, though they
realized that Anna's sanctimoniousness was perhaps a good thing for
their father. A preacher ought to have one child who did more than
merely acquiesce in religious observances, and Thea and the boys were
glad enough that it was Anna and not one of themselves who assumed this
obligation.

“Anna, she's American,” Mrs. Kronborg used to say. The Scandinavian
mould of countenance, more or less marked in each of the other children,
was scarcely discernible in her, and she looked enough like other
Moonstone girls to be thought pretty. Anna's nature was conventional, like
her face. Her position as the minister's eldest daughter was important
to her, and she tried to live up to it. She read sentimental religious
story-books and emulated the spiritual struggles and magnanimous
behavior of their persecuted heroines. Everything had to be interpreted
for Anna. Her opinions about the smallest and most commonplace things
were gleaned from the Denver papers, the church weeklies, from sermons
and Sunday-School addresses. Scarcely anything was attractive to her in
its natural state--indeed, scarcely anything was decent until it was
clothed by the opinion of some authority. Her ideas about habit,
character, duty, love, marriage, were grouped under heads, like a book
of popular quotations, and were totally unrelated to the emergencies of
human living. She discussed all these subjects with other Methodist
girls of her age. They would spend hours, for instance, in deciding what
they would or would not tolerate in a suitor or a husband, and the
frailties of masculine nature were too often a subject of discussion
among them. In her behavior Anna was a harmless girl, mild except where
her prejudices were concerned, neat and industrious, with no graver
fault than priggishness; but her mind had really shocking habits of
classification. The wickedness of Denver and of Chicago, and even of
Moonstone, occupied her thoughts too much. She had none of the delicacy
that goes with a nature of warm impulses, but the kind of fishy
curiosity which justifies itself by an expression of horror.

Thea, and all Thea's ways and friends, seemed indecorous to Anna. She
not only felt a grave social discrimination against the Mexicans; she
could not forget that Spanish Johnny was a drunkard and that “nobody
knew what he did when he ran away from home.” Thea pretended, of course,
that she liked the Mexicans because they were fond of music; but every
one knew that music was nothing very real, and that it did not matter in
a girl's relations with people. What was real, then, and what did
matter ? Poor Anna!

Anna approved of Ray Kennedy as a young man of steady habits and
blameless life, but she regretted that he was an atheist, and that he
was not a passenger conductor with brass buttons on his coat. On the
whole, she wondered what such an exemplary young man found to like in
Thea. Dr. Archie she treated respectfully because of his position in
Moonstone, but she KNEW he had kissed the Mexican barytone's pretty
daughter, and she had a whole DOSSIER of evidence about his behavior in
his hours of relaxation in Denver. He was “fast,” and it was because he
was “fast” that Thea liked him. Thea always liked that kind of people.
Dr. Archie's whole manner with Thea, Anna often told her mother, was too
free. He was always putting his hand on Thea's head, or holding her hand
while he laughed and looked down at her. The kindlier manifestation of
human nature (about which Anna sang and talked, in the interests of
which she went to conventions and wore white ribbons) were never
realities to her after all. She did not believe in them. It was only in
attitudes of protest or reproof, clinging to the cross, that human
beings could be even temporarily decent.

Preacher Kronborg's secret convictions were very much like Anna's. He
believed that his wife was absolutely good, but there was not a man or
woman in his congregation whom he trusted all the way.

Mrs. Kronborg, on the other hand, was likely to find something to admire
in almost any human conduct that was positive and energetic. She could
always be taken in by the stories of tramps and runaway boys. She went
to the circus and admired the bareback riders, who were “likely good
enough women in their way.” She admired Dr. Archie's fine physique and
well-cut clothes as much as Thea did, and said she “felt it was a
privilege to be handled by such a gentleman when she was sick.”

Soon after Anna became a church member she began to remonstrate with
Thea about practicing--playing “secular music”--on Sunday. One Sunday
the dispute in the parlor grew warm and was carried to Mrs. Kronborg in
the kitchen. She listened judicially and told Anna to read the chapter
about how Naaman the leper was permitted to bow down in the house of
Rimmon. Thea went back to the piano, and Anna lingered to say that,
since she was in the right, her mother should have supported her.

“No,” said Mrs. Kronborg, rather indifferently, “I can't see it that
way, Anna. I never forced you to practice, and I don't see as I should
keep Thea from it. I like to hear her, and I guess your father does. You
and Thea will likely follow different lines, and I don't see as I'm
called upon to bring you up alike.”

Anna looked meek and abused. “Of course all the church people must hear
her. Ours is the only noisy house on this street. You hear what she's
playing now, don't you ?”

Mrs. Kronborg rose from browning her coffee. “Yes; it's the Blue Danube
waltzes. I'm familiar with 'em. If any of the church people come at you,
you just send 'em to me. I ain't afraid to speak out on occasion, and I
wouldn't mind one bit telling the Ladies' Aid a few things about
standard composers.” Mrs. Kronborg smiled, and added thoughtfully, “No,
I wouldn't mind that one bit.”

Anna went about with a reserved and distant air for a week, and Mrs.
Kronborg suspected that she held a larger place than usual in her
daughter's prayers; but that was another thing she didn't mind.


Although revivals were merely a part of the year's work, like
examination week at school, and although Anna's piety impressed her very
little, a time came when Thea was perplexed about religion. A scourge of
typhoid broke out in Moonstone and several of Thea's schoolmates died of
it. She went to their funerals, saw them put into the ground, and
wondered a good deal about them. But a certain grim incident, which
caused the epidemic, troubled her even more than the death of her
friends.

Early in July, soon after Thea's fifteenth birthday, a particularly
disgusting sort of tramp came into Moonstone in an empty box car. Thea
was sitting in the hammock in the front yard when he first crawled up to
the town from the depot, carrying a bundle wrapped in dirty ticking
under one arm, and under the other a wooden box with rusty screening
nailed over one end. He had a thin, hungry face covered with black hair.
It was just before suppertime when he came along, and the street smelled
of fried potatoes and fried onions and coffee. Thea saw him sniffing the
air greedily and walking slower and slower. He looked over the fence.
She hoped he would not stop at their gate, for her mother never turned
any one away, and this was the dirtiest and most utterly
wretched-looking tramp she had ever seen. There was a terrible odor
about him, too. She caught it even at that distance, and put her
handkerchief to her nose. A moment later she was sorry, for she knew
that he had noticed it. He looked away and shuffled a little faster.

A few days later Thea heard that the tramp had camped in an empty shack
over on the east edge of town, beside the ravine, and was trying to give
a miserable sort of show there. He told the boys who went to see what he
was doing, that he had traveled with a circus. His bundle contained a
filthy clown's suit, and his box held half a dozen rattlesnakes.

Saturday night, when Thea went to the butcher shop to get the chickens
for Sunday, she heard the whine of an accordion and saw a crowd before
one of the saloons. There she found the tramp, his bony body grotesquely
attired in the clown's suit, his face shaved and painted white,--the
sweat trickling through the paint and washing it away,--and his eyes
wild and feverish. Pulling the accordion in and out seemed to be almost
too great an effort for him, and he panted to the tune of “Marching
through Georgia.” After a considerable crowd had gathered, the tramp
exhibited his box of snakes, announced that he would now pass the hat,
and that when the onlookers had contributed the sum of one dollar, he
would eat “one of these living reptiles.” The crowd began to cough and
murmur, and the saloon keeper rushed off for the marshal, who arrested
the wretch for giving a show without a license and hurried him away to
the calaboose.

The calaboose stood in a sunflower patch,--an old hut with a barred
window and a padlock on the door. The tramp was utterly filthy and there
was no way to give him a bath. The law made no provision to grub-stake
vagrants, so after the constable had detained the tramp for twentyfour
hours, he released him and told him to “get out of town, and get quick.”
 The fellow's rattlesnakes had been killed by the saloon keeper. He hid
in a box car in the freight yard, probably hoping to get a ride to the
next station, but he was found and put out. After that he was seen no
more. He had disappeared and left no trace except an ugly, stupid word,
chalked on the black paint of the seventy-five-foot standpipe which was
the reservoir for the Moonstone water-supply; the same word, in another
tongue, that the French soldier shouted at Waterloo to the English
officer who bade the Old Guard surrender; a comment on life which the
defeated, along the hard roads of the world, sometimes bawl at the
victorious.

A week after the tramp excitement had passed over, the city water began
to smell and to taste. The Kronborgs had a well in their back yard and
did not use city water, but they heard the complaints of their
neighbors. At first people said that the town well was full of rotting
cottonwood roots, but the engineer at the pumping-station convinced the
mayor that the water left the well untainted. Mayors reason slowly, but,
the well being eliminated, the official mind had to travel toward the
standpipe--there was no other track for it to go in. The standpipe amply
rewarded investigation. The tramp had got even with Moonstone. He had
climbed the standpipe by the handholds and let himself down into
seventy-five feet of cold water, with his shoes and hat and roll of
ticking. The city council had a mild panic and passed a new ordinance
about tramps. But the fever had already broken out, and several adults
and half a dozen children died of it.

Thea had always found everything that happened in Moonstone exciting,
disasters particularly so. It was gratifying to read sensational
Moonstone items in the Denver paper. But she wished she had not chanced
to see the tramp as he came into town that evening, sniffing the
supper-laden air. His face remained unpleasantly clear in her memory,
and her mind struggled with the problem of his behavior as if it were a
hard page in arithmetic. Even when she was practicing, the drama of the
tramp kept going on in the back of her head, and she was constantly
trying to make herself realize what pitch of hatred or despair could
drive a man to do such a hideous thing. She kept seeing him in his
bedraggled clown suit, the white paint on his roughly shaven face,
playing his accordion before the saloon. She had noticed his lean body,
his high, bald forehead that sloped back like a curved metal lid. How
could people fall so far out of fortune ? She tried to talk to Ray
Kennedy about her perplexity, but Ray would not discuss things of that
sort with her. It was in his sentimental conception of women that they
should be deeply religious, though men were at liberty to doubt and
finally to deny. A picture called “The Soul Awakened,” popular in
Moonstone parlors, pretty well interpreted Ray's idea of woman's
spiritual nature.

One evening when she was haunted by the figure of the tramp, Thea went
up to Dr. Archie's office. She found him sewing up two bad gashes in the
face of a little boy who had been kicked by a mule. After the boy had
been bandaged and sent away with his father, Thea helped the doctor wash
and put away the surgical instruments. Then she dropped into her
accustomed seat beside his desk and began to talk about the tramp. Her
eyes were hard and green with excitement, the doctor noticed.

“It seems to me, Dr. Archie, that the whole town's to blame. I'm to
blame, myself. I know he saw me hold my nose when he went by. Father's
to blame. If he believes the Bible, he ought to have gone to the
calaboose and cleaned that man up and taken care of him. That's what I
can't understand; do people believe the Bible, or don't they ? If the
next life is all that matters, and we're put here to get ready for it,
then why do we try to make money, or learn things, or have a good time ?
There's not one person in Moonstone that really lives the way the New
Testament says. Does it matter, or don't it ?”

Dr. Archie swung round in his chair and looked at her, honestly and
leniently. “Well, Thea, it seems to me like this. Every people has had
its religion. All religions are good, and all are pretty much alike. But
I don't see how we could live up to them in the sense you mean. I've
thought about it a good deal, and I can't help feeling that while we are
in this world we have to live for the best things of this world, and
those things are material and positive. Now, most religions are passive,
and they tell us chiefly what we should not do.” The doctor moved
restlessly, and his eyes hunted for something along the opposite wall:
“See here, my girl, take out the years of early childhood and the time
we spend in sleep and dull old age, and we only have about twenty able,
waking years. That's not long enough to get acquainted with half the
fine things that have been done in the world, much less to do anything
ourselves. I think we ought to keep the Commandments and help other
people all we can; but the main thing is to live those twenty splendid
years; to do all we can and enjoy all we can.”

Dr. Archie met his little friend's searching gaze, the look of acute
inquiry which always touched him.

“But poor fellows like that tramp--” she hesitated and wrinkled her
forehead.

The doctor leaned forward and put his hand protectingly over hers, which
lay clenched on the green felt desktop. “Ugly accidents happen, Thea;
always have and always will. But the failures are swept back into the
pile and forgotten. They don't leave any lasting scar in the world, and
they don't affect the future. The things that last are the good things.
The people who forge ahead and do something, they really count.” He saw
tears on her cheeks, and he remembered that he had never seen her cry
before, not even when she crushed her finger when she was little. He
rose and walked to the window, came back and sat down on the edge of his
chair.

“Forget the tramp, Thea. This is a great big world, and I want you to
get about and see it all. You're going to Chicago some day, and do
something with that fine voice of yours. You're going to be a number one
musician and make us proud of you. Take Mary Anderson, now; even the
tramps are proud of her. There isn't a tramp along the 'Q' system who
hasn't heard of her. We all like people who do things, even if we only
see their faces on a cigar-box lid.”

They had a long talk. Thea felt that Dr. Archie had never let himself
out to her so much before. It was the most grown-up conversation she had
ever had with him. She left his office happy, flattered and stimulated.
She ran for a long while about the white, moonlit streets, looking up at
the stars and the bluish night, at the quiet houses sunk in black shade,
the glittering sand hills. She loved the familiar trees, and the people
in those little houses, and she loved the unknown world beyond Denver.
She felt as if she were being pulled in two, between the desire to go
away forever and the desire to stay forever. She had only twenty
years--no time to lose.

Many a night that summer she left Dr. Archie's office with a desire to
run and run about those quiet streets until she wore out her shoes, or
wore out the streets themselves; when her chest ached and it seemed as
if her heart were spreading all over the desert. When she went home, it
was not to go to sleep. She used to drag her mattress beside her low
window and lie awake for a long while, vibrating with excitement, as a
machine vibrates from speed. Life rushed in upon her through that
window--or so it seemed. In reality, of course, life rushes from within,
not from without. There is no work of art so big or so beautiful that it
was not once all contained in some youthful body, like this one which
lay on the floor in the moonlight, pulsing with ardor and anticipation.
It was on such nights that Thea Kronborg learned the thing that old
Dumas meant when he told the Romanticists that to make a drama he needed
but one passion and four walls.




XIX

It is well for its peace of mind that the traveling public takes
railroads so much for granted. The only men who are incurably nervous
about railway travel are the railroad operatives. A railroad man never
forgets that the next run may be his turn.

On a single-track road, like that upon which Ray Kennedy worked, the
freight trains make their way as best they can between passenger trains.
Even when there is such a thing as a freight time-schedule, it is merely
a form. Along the one track dozens of fast and slow trains dash in both
directions, kept from collision only by the brains in the dispatcher's
office. If one passenger train is late, the whole schedule must be
revised in an instant; the trains following must be warned, and those
moving toward the belated train must be assigned new meeting-places.

Between the shifts and modifications of the passenger schedule, the
freight trains play a game of their own. They have no right to the track
at any given time, but are supposed to be on it when it is free, and to
make the best time they can between passenger trains. A freight train,
on a single-track road, gets anywhere at all only by stealing bases.

Ray Kennedy had stuck to the freight service, although he had had
opportunities to go into the passenger service at higher pay. He always
regarded railroading as a temporary makeshift, until he “got into
something,” and he disliked the passenger service. No brass buttons for
him, he said; too much like a livery. While he was railroading he would
wear a jumper, thank you!

The wreck that “caught” Ray was a very commonplace one; nothing
thrilling about it, and it got only six lines in the Denver papers. It
happened about daybreak one morning, only thirty-two miles from home.

At four o'clock in the morning Ray's train had stopped to take water at
Saxony, having just rounded the long curve which lies south of that
station. It was Joe Giddy's business to walk back along the curve about
three hundred yards and put out torpedoes to warn any train which might
be coming up from behind--a freight crew is not notified of trains
following, and the brakeman is supposed to protect his train. Ray was so
fussy about the punctilious observance of orders that almost any
brakeman would take a chance once in a while, from natural perversity.

When the train stopped for water that morning, Ray was at the desk in
his caboose, making out his report. Giddy took his torpedoes, swung off
the rear platform, and glanced back at the curve. He decided that he
would not go back to flag this time. If anything was coming up behind,
he could hear it in plenty of time. So he ran forward to look after a
hot journal that had been bothering him. In a general way, Giddy's
reasoning was sound. If a freight train, or even a passenger train, had
been coming up behind them, he could have heard it in time. But as it
happened, a light engine, which made no noise at all, was
coming,--ordered out to help with the freight that was piling up at the
other end of the division. This engine got no warning, came round the
curve, struck the caboose, went straight through it, and crashed into
the heavy lumber car ahead.


The Kronborgs were just sitting down to breakfast, when the night
telegraph operator dashed into the yard at a run and hammered on the
front door. Gunner answered the knock, and the telegraph operator told
him he wanted to see his father a minute, quick. Mr. Kronborg appeared
at the door, napkin in hand. The operator was pale and panting.

“Fourteen was wrecked down at Saxony this morning,” he shouted, “and
Kennedy's all broke up. We're sending an engine down with the doctor,
and the operator at Saxony says Kennedy wants you to come along with us
and bring your girl.” He stopped for breath.

Mr. Kronborg took off his glasses and began rubbing them with his
napkin.

“Bring--I don't understand,” he muttered. “How did this happen ?”

“No time for that, sir. Getting the engine out now. Your girl, Thea.
You'll surely do that for the poor chap. Everybody knows he thinks the
world of her.” Seeing that Mr. Kronborg showed no indication of having
made up his mind, the operator turned to Gunner. “Call your sister, kid.
I'm going to ask the girl herself,” he blurted out.

“Yes, yes, certainly. Daughter,” Mr. Kronborg called. He had somewhat
recovered himself and reached to the hall hatrack for his hat.

Just as Thea came out on the front porch, before the operator had had
time to explain to her, Dr. Archie's ponies came up to the gate at a
brisk trot. Archie jumped out the moment his driver stopped the team and
came up to the bewildered girl without so much as saying good-morning to
any one. He took her hand with the sympathetic, reassuring graveness
which had helped her at more than one hard time in her life. “Get your
hat, my girl. Kennedy's hurt down the road, and he wants you to run down
with me. They'll have a car for us. Get into my buggy, Mr. Kronborg.
I'll drive you down, and Larry can come for the team.”

The driver jumped out of the buggy and Mr. Kronborg and the doctor got
in. Thea, still bewildered, sat on her father's knee. Dr. Archie gave
his ponies a smart cut with the whip.

When they reached the depot, the engine, with one car attached, was
standing on the main track. The engineer had got his steam up, and was
leaning out of the cab impatiently. In a moment they were off. The run
to Saxony took forty minutes. Thea sat still in her seat while Dr.
Archie and her father talked about the wreck. She took no part in the
conversation and asked no questions, but occasionally she looked at Dr.
Archie with a frightened, inquiring glance, which he answered by an
encouraging nod. Neither he nor her father said anything about how badly
Ray was hurt. When the engine stopped near Saxony, the main track was
already cleared. As they got out of the car, Dr. Archie pointed to a
pile of ties.

“Thea, you'd better sit down here and watch the wreck crew while your
father and I go up and look Kennedy over. I'll come back for you when I
get him fixed up.”

The two men went off up the sand gulch, and Thea sat down and looked at
the pile of splintered wood and twisted iron that had lately been Ray's
caboose. She was frightened and absent-minded. She felt that she ought
to be thinking about Ray, but her mind kept racing off to all sorts of
trivial and irrelevant things. She wondered whether Grace Johnson would
be furious when she came to take her music lesson and found nobody there
to give it to her; whether she had forgotten to close the piano last
night and whether Thor would get into the new room and mess the keys all
up with his sticky fingers; whether Tillie would go upstairs and make
her bed for her. Her mind worked fast, but she could fix it upon
nothing. The grasshoppers, the lizards, distracted her attention and
seemed more real to her than poor Ray.

On their way to the sand bank where Ray had been carried, Dr. Archie and
Mr. Kronborg met the Saxony doctor. He shook hands with them.

“Nothing you can do, doctor. I couldn't count the fractures. His back's
broken, too. He wouldn't be alive now if he weren't so confoundedly
strong, poor chap. No use bothering him. I've given him morphia, one and
a half, in eighths.”

Dr. Archie hurried on. Ray was lying on a flat canvas litter, under the
shelter of a shelving bank, lightly shaded by a slender cottonwood tree.
When the doctor and the preacher approached, he looked at them intently.

“Didn't--” he closed his eyes to hide his bitter disappointment.

Dr. Archie knew what was the matter. “Thea's back there, Ray. I'll bring
her as soon as I've had a look at you.”

Ray looked up. “You might clean me up a trifle, doc. Won't need you for
anything else, thank you all the same.”

However little there was left of him, that little was certainly Ray
Kennedy. His personality was as positive as ever, and the blood and dirt
on his face seemed merely accidental, to have nothing to do with the man
himself. Dr. Archie told Mr. Kronborg to bring a pail of water, and he
began to sponge Ray's face and neck. Mr. Kronborg stood by, nervously
rubbing his hands together and trying to think of something to say.
Serious situations always embarrassed him and made him formal, even when
he felt real sympathy.

“In times like this, Ray,” he brought out at last, crumpling up his
handkerchief in his long fingers,--“in times like this, we don't want to
forget the Friend that sticketh closer than a brother.”

Ray looked up at him; a lonely, disconsolate smile played over his mouth
and his square cheeks. “Never mind about all that, PADRE,” he said
quietly. “Christ and me fell out long ago.”

There was a moment of silence. Then Ray took pity on Mr. Kronborg's
embarrassment. “You go back for the little girl, PADRE. I want a word
with the doc in private.”

Ray talked to Dr. Archie for a few moments, then stopped suddenly, with
a broad smile. Over the doctor's shoulder he saw Thea coming up the
gulch, in her pink chambray dress, carrying her sun-hat by the strings.
Such a yellow head! He often told himself that he “was perfectly
foolish about her hair.” The sight of her, coming, went through
him softly, like the morphia. “There she is,” he whispered. “Get the old
preacher out of the way, doc. I want to have a little talk with her.”

Dr. Archie looked up. Thea was hurrying and yet hanging back. She was
more frightened than he had thought she would be. She had gone with him
to see very sick people and had always been steady and calm. As she came
up, she looked at the ground, and he could see that she had been crying.

Ray Kennedy made an unsuccessful effort to put out his hand. “Hello,
little kid, nothing to be afraid of. Darned if I don't believe they've
gone and scared you! Nothing to cry about. I'm the same old goods, only
a little dented. Sit down on my coat there, and keep me company. I've
got to lay still a bit.”

Dr. Archie and Mr. Kronborg disappeared. Thea cast a timid glance after
them, but she sat down resolutely and took Ray's hand.

“You ain't scared now, are you ?” he asked affectionately. “You were a
regular brick to come, Thee. Did you get any breakfast ?”

“No, Ray, I'm not scared. Only I'm dreadful sorry you're hurt, and I
can't help crying.”

His broad, earnest face, languid from the opium and smiling with such
simple happiness, reassured her. She drew nearer to him and lifted his
hand to her knee. He looked at her with his clear, shallow blue eyes.
How he loved everything about that face and head! How many nights in his
cupola, looking up the track, he had seen that face in the darkness;
through the sleet and snow, or in the soft blue air when the moonlight
slept on the desert.

“You needn't bother to talk, Thee. The doctor's medicine makes me sort
of dopey. But it's nice to have company. Kind of cozy, don't you think ?
Pull my coat under you more. It's a darned shame I can't wait on you.”

“No, no, Ray. I'm all right. Yes, I like it here. And I guess you ought
not to talk much, ought you ? If you can sleep, I'll stay right here, and
be awful quiet. I feel just as much at home with you as ever, now.”

That simple, humble, faithful something in Ray's eyes went straight to
Thea's heart. She did feel comfortable with him, and happy to give him
so much happiness. It was the first time she had ever been conscious of
that power to bestow intense happiness by simply being near any one. She
always remembered this day as the beginning of that knowledge. She bent
over him and put her lips softly to his cheek.

Ray's eyes filled with light. “Oh, do that again, kid!” he said
impulsively. Thea kissed him on the forehead, blushing faintly. Ray held
her hand fast and closed his eyes with a deep sigh of happiness. The
morphia and the sense of her nearness filled him with content. The gold
mine, the oil well, the copper ledge--all pipe dreams, he mused, and
this was a dream, too. He might have known it before. It had always been
like that; the things he admired had always been away out of his reach:
a college education, a gentleman's manner, an Englishman's
accent--things over his head. And Thea was farther out of his reach than
all the rest put together. He had been a fool to imagine it, but he was
glad he had been a fool. She had given him one grand dream. Every mile
of his run, from Moonstone to Denver, was painted with the colors of
that hope. Every cactus knew about it. But now that it was not to be, he
knew the truth. Thea was never meant for any rough fellow like
him--hadn't he really known that all along, he asked himself ? She wasn't
meant for common men. She was like wedding cake, a thing to dream on. He
raised his eyelids a little. She was stroking his hand and looking off
into the distance. He felt in her face that look of unconscious power
that Wunsch had seen there. Yes, she was bound for the big terminals of
the world; no way stations for her. His lids drooped. In the dark he
could see her as she would be after a while; in a box at the Tabor Grand
in Denver, with diamonds on her neck and a tiara in her yellow hair,
with all the people looking at her through their opera-glasses, and a
United States Senator, maybe, talking to her. “Then you'll remember me!”
 He opened his eyes, and they were full of tears.

Thea leaned closer. “What did you say, Ray ? I couldn't hear.”

“Then you'll remember me,” he whispered.

The spark in his eye, which is one's very self, caught the spark in hers
that was herself, and for a moment they looked into each other's
natures. Thea realized how good and how great-hearted he was, and he
realized about her many things. When that elusive spark of personality
retreated in each of them, Thea still saw in his wet eyes her own face,
very small, but much prettier than the cracked glass at home had ever
shown it. It was the first time she had seen her face in that kindest
mirror a woman can ever find.

Ray had felt things in that moment when he seemed to be looking into the
very soul of Thea Kronborg. Yes, the gold mine, the oil well, the copper
ledge, they'd all got away from him, as things will; but he'd backed a
winner once in his life! With all his might he gave his faith to the
broad little hand he held. He wished he could leave her the rugged
strength of his body to help her through with it all. He would have
liked to tell her a little about his old dream,--there seemed long years
between him and it already,--but to tell her now would somehow be
unfair; wouldn't be quite the straightest thing in the world. Probably
she knew, anyway. He looked up quickly. “You know, don't you, Thee, that
I think you are just the finest thing I've struck in this world ?”

The tears ran down Thea's cheeks. “You're too good to me, Ray. You're a
lot too good to me,” she faltered.

“Why, kid,” he murmured, “everybody in this world's going to be good to
you!”

Dr. Archie came to the gulch and stood over his patient. “How's it
going ?”

“Can't you give me another punch with your pacifier, doc ? The little
girl had better run along now.” Ray released Thea's hand. “See you
later, Thee.”

She got up and moved away aimlessly, carrying her hat by the strings.
Ray looked after her with the exaltation born of bodily pain and said
between his teeth, “Always look after that girl, doc. She's a queen!”

Thea and her father went back to Moonstone on the one-o'clock passenger.
Dr. Archie stayed with Ray Kennedy until he died, late in the afternoon.




XX

On Monday morning, the day after Ray Kennedy's funeral, Dr. Archie
called at Mr. Kronborg's study, a little room behind the church. Mr.
Kronborg did not write out his sermons, but spoke from notes jotted upon
small pieces of cardboard in a kind of shorthand of his own. As sermons
go, they were not worse than most. His conventional rhetoric pleased the
majority of his congregation, and Mr. Kronborg was generally regarded as
a model preacher. He did not smoke, he never touched spirits. His
indulgence in the pleasures of the table was an endearing bond between
him and the women of his congregation. He ate enormously, with a zest
which seemed incongruous with his spare frame.

This morning the doctor found him opening his mail and reading a pile of
advertising circulars with deep attention.

“Good-morning, Mr. Kronborg,” said Dr. Archie, sitting down. “I came to
see you on business. Poor Kennedy asked me to look after his affairs for
him. Like most railroad men he spent his wages, except for a few
investments in mines which don't look to me very promising. But his life
was insured for six hundred dollars in Thea's favor.”

Mr. Kronborg wound his feet about the standard of his desk-chair. “I
assure you, doctor, this is a complete surprise to me.”

“Well, it's not very surprising to me,” Dr. Archie went on. “He talked
to me about it the day he was hurt. He said he wanted the money to be
used in a particular way, and in no other.” Dr. Archie paused meaningly.

Mr. Kronborg fidgeted. “I am sure Thea would observe his wishes in every
respect.”

“No doubt; but he wanted me to see that you agreed to his plan. It seems
that for some time Thea has wanted to go away to study music. It was
Kennedy's wish that she should take this money and go to Chicago this
winter. He felt that it would be an advantage to her in a business way:
that even if she came back here to teach, it would give her more
authority and make her position here more comfortable.”

Mr. Kronborg looked a little startled. “She is very young,” he
hesitated; “she is barely seventeen. Chicago is a long way from home. We
would have to consider. I think, Dr. Archie, we had better consult Mrs.
Kronborg.”

“I think I can bring Mrs. Kronborg around, if I have your consent. I've
always found her pretty level-headed. I have several old classmates
practicing in Chicago. One is a throat specialist. He has a good deal to
do with singers. He probably knows the best piano teachers and could
recommend a boarding-house where music students stay. I think Thea needs
to get among a lot of young people who are clever like herself. Here she
has no companions but old fellows like me. It's not a natural life for a
young girl. She'll either get warped, or wither up before her time. If
it will make you and Mrs. Kronborg feel any easier, I'll be glad to take
Thea to Chicago and see that she gets started right. This throat man I
speak of is a big fellow in his line, and if I can get him interested,
he may be able to put her in the way of a good many things. At any rate,
he'll know the right teachers. Of course, six hundred dollars won't take
her very far, but even half the winter there would be a great advantage.
I think Kennedy sized the situation up exactly.”

“Perhaps; I don't doubt it. You are very kind, Dr. Archie.” Mr. Kronborg
was ornamenting his desk-blotter with hieroglyphics. “I should think
Denver might be better. There we could watch over her. She is very
young.”

Dr. Archie rose. “Kennedy didn't mention Denver. He said Chicago,
repeatedly. Under the circumstances, it seems to me we ought to try to
carry out his wishes exactly, if Thea is willing.”

“Certainly, certainly. Thea is conscientious. She would not waste her
opportunities.” Mr. Kronborg paused. “If Thea were your own daughter,
doctor, would you consent to such a plan, at her present age ?”

“I most certainly should. In fact, if she were my daughter, I'd have
sent her away before this. She's a most unusual child, and she's only
wasting herself here. At her age she ought to be learning, not teaching.
She'll never learn so quickly and easily as she will right now.”

“Well, doctor, you had better talk it over with Mrs. Kronborg. I make it
a point to defer to her wishes in such matters. She understands all her
children perfectly. I may say that she has all a mother's insight, and
more.”

Dr. Archie smiled. “Yes, and then some. I feel quite confident about
Mrs. Kronborg. We usually agree. Good-morning.”

Dr. Archie stepped out into the hot sunshine and walked rapidly toward
his office, with a determined look on his face. He found his
waiting-room full of patients, and it was one o'clock before he had
dismissed the last one. Then he shut his door and took a drink before
going over to the hotel for his lunch. He smiled as he locked his
cupboard. “I feel almost as gay as if I were going to get away for a
winter myself,” he thought.


Afterward Thea could never remember much about that summer, or how she
lived through her impatience. She was to set off with Dr. Archie on the
fifteenth of October, and she gave lessons until the first of September.
Then she began to get her clothes ready, and spent whole afternoons in
the village dressmaker's stuffy, littered little sewing-room. Thea and
her mother made a trip to Denver to buy the materials for her dresses.
Ready-made clothes for girls were not to be had in those days. Miss
Spencer, the dressmaker, declared that she could do handsomely by Thea
if they would only let her carry out her own ideas. But Mrs. Kronborg
and Thea felt that Miss Spencer's most daring productions might seem out
of place in Chicago, so they restrained her with a firm hand. Tillie,
who always helped Mrs. Kronborg with the family sewing, was for letting
Miss Spencer challenge Chicago on Thea's person. Since Ray Kennedy's
death, Thea had become more than ever one of Tillie's heroines. Tillie
swore each of her friends to secrecy, and, coming home from church or
leaning over the fence, told them the most touching stories about Ray's
devotion, and how Thea would “never get over it.”

Tillie's confidences stimulated the general discussion of Thea's
venture. This discussion went on, upon front porches and in back yards,
pretty much all summer. Some people approved of Thea's going to Chicago,
but most people did not. There were others who changed their minds about
it every day.

Tillie said she wanted Thea to have a ball dress “above all things.” She
bought a fashion book especially devoted to evening clothes and looked
hungrily over the colored plates, picking out costumes that would be
becoming to “a blonde.” She wanted Thea to have all the gay clothes she
herself had always longed for; clothes she often told herself she needed
“to recite in.”

“Tillie,” Thea used to cry impatiently, “can't you see that if Miss
Spencer tried to make one of those things, she'd make me look like a
circus girl ? Anyhow, I don't know anybody in Chicago. I won't be going
to parties.”

Tillie always replied with a knowing toss of her head, “You see! You'll
be in society before you know it. There ain't many girls as accomplished
as you.”

On the morning of the fifteenth of October the Kronborg family, all of
them but Gus, who couldn't leave the store, started for the station an
hour before train time. Charley had taken Thea's trunk and telescope to
the depot in his delivery wagon early that morning. Thea wore her new
blue serge traveling-dress, chosen for its serviceable qualities. She
had done her hair up carefully, and had put a pale-blue ribbon around
her throat, under a little lace collar that Mrs. Kohler had crocheted
for her. As they went out of the gate, Mrs. Kronborg looked her over
thoughtfully. Yes, that blue ribbon went very well with the dress, and
with Thea's eyes. Thea had a rather unusual touch about such things, she
reflected comfortably. Tillie always said that Thea was “so indifferent
to dress,” but her mother noticed that she usually put her clothes on
well. She felt the more at ease about letting Thea go away from home,
because she had good sense about her clothes and never tried to dress up
too much. Her coloring was so individual, she was so unusually fair,
that in the wrong clothes she might easily have been “conspicuous.”

It was a fine morning, and the family set out from the house in good
spirits. Thea was quiet and calm. She had forgotten nothing, and she
clung tightly to her handbag, which held her trunk-key and all of her
money that was not in an envelope pinned to her chemise. Thea walked
behind the others, holding Thor by the hand, and this time she did not
feel that the procession was too long. Thor was uncommunicative that
morning, and would only talk about how he would rather get a sand bur in
his toe every day than wear shoes and stockings. As they passed the
cottonwood grove where Thea often used to bring him in his cart, she
asked him who would take him for nice long walks after sister went away.

“Oh, I can walk in our yard,” he replied unappreciatively. “I guess I
can make a pond for my duck.”

Thea leaned down and looked into his face. “But you won't forget about
sister, will you ?” Thor shook his head. “And won't you be glad when
sister comes back and can take you over to Mrs. Kohler's to see the
pigeons ?”

“Yes, I'll be glad. But I'm going to have a pigeon my own self.”

“But you haven't got any little house for one. Maybe Axel would make you
a little house.”

“Oh, her can live in the barn, her can,” Thor drawled indifferently.

Thea laughed and squeezed his hand. She always liked his sturdy
matter-of-factness. Boys ought to be like that, she thought.

When they reached the depot, Mr. Kronborg paced the platform somewhat
ceremoniously with his daughter. Any member of his flock would have
gathered that he was giving her good counsel about meeting the
temptations of the world. He did, indeed, begin to admonish her not to
forget that talents come from our Heavenly Father and are to be used for
his glory, but he cut his remarks short and looked at his watch. He
believed that Thea was a religious girl, but when she looked at him with
that intent, that passionately inquiring gaze which used to move even
Wunsch, Mr. Kronborg suddenly felt his eloquence fail. Thea was like her
mother, he reflected; you couldn't put much sentiment across with her.
As a usual thing, he liked girls to be a little more responsive. He
liked them to blush at his compliments; as Mrs. Kronborg candidly said,
“Father could be very soft with the girls.” But this morning he was
thinking that hard-headedness was a reassuring quality in a daughter who
was going to Chicago alone.

Mr. Kronborg believed that big cities were places where people went to
lose their identity and to be wicked. He himself, when he was a student
at the Seminary--he coughed and opened his watch again. He knew, of
course, that a great deal of business went on in Chicago, that there was
an active Board of Trade, and that hogs and cattle were slaughtered
there. But when, as a young man, he had stopped over in Chicago, he had
not interested himself in the commercial activities of the city. He
remembered it as a place full of cheap shows and dance halls and boys
from the country who were behaving disgustingly.

Dr. Archie drove up to the station about ten minutes before the train
was due. His man tied the ponies and stood holding the doctor's
alligator-skin bag--very elegant, Thea thought it. Mrs. Kronborg did not
burden the doctor with warnings and cautions. She said again that she
hoped he could get Thea a comfortable place to stay, where they had good
beds, and she hoped the landlady would be a woman who'd had children of
her own. “I don't go much on old maids looking after girls,” she
remarked as she took a pin out of her own hat and thrust it into Thea's
blue turban. “You'll be sure to lose your hatpins on the train, Thea.
It's better to have an extra one in case.” She tucked in a little curl
that had escaped from Thea's careful twist. “Don't forget to brush your
dress often, and pin it up to the curtains of your berth to-night, so it
won't wrinkle. If you get it wet, have a tailor press it before it
draws.”

She turned Thea about by the shoulders and looked her over a last time.
Yes, she looked very well. She wasn't pretty, exactly,--her face was too
broad and her nose was too big. But she had that lovely skin, and she
looked fresh and sweet. She had always been a sweet-smelling child. Her
mother had always liked to kiss her, when she happened to think of it.

The train whistled in, and Mr. Kronborg carried the canvas “telescope”
 into the car. Thea kissed them all good-bye. Tillie cried, but she was
the only one who did. They all shouted things up at the closed window of
the Pullman car, from which Thea looked down at them as from a frame,
her face glowing with excitement, her turban a little tilted in spite of
three hatpins. She had already taken off her new gloves to save them.
Mrs. Kronborg reflected that she would never see just that same picture
again, and as Thea's car slid off along the rails, she wiped a tear from
her eye. “She won't come back a little girl,” Mrs. Kronborg said to her
husband as they turned to go home. “Anyhow, she's been a sweet one.”

While the Kronborg family were trooping slowly homeward, Thea was
sitting in the Pullman, her telescope in the seat beside her, her
handbag tightly gripped in her fingers. Dr. Archie had gone into the
smoker. He thought she might be a little tearful, and that it would be
kinder to leave her alone for a while. Her eyes did fill once, when she
saw the last of the sand hills and realized that she was going to leave
them behind for a long while. They always made her think of Ray, too.
She had had such good times with him out there.

But, of course, it was herself and her own adventure that mattered to
her. If youth did not matter so much to itself, it would never have the
heart to go on. Thea was surprised that she did not feel a deeper sense
of loss at leaving her old life behind her. It seemed, on the contrary,
as she looked out at the yellow desert speeding by, that she had left
very little. Everything that was essential seemed to be right there in
the car with her. She lacked nothing. She even felt more compact and
confident than usual. She was all there, and something else was there,
too,--in her heart, was it, or under her cheek ? Anyhow, it was about her
somewhere, that warm sureness, that sturdy little companion with whom
she shared a secret.

When Dr. Archie came in from the smoker, she was sitting still, looking
intently out of the window and smiling, her lips a little parted, her
hair in a blaze of sunshine. The doctor thought she was the prettiest
thing he had ever seen, and very funny, with her telescope and big
handbag. She made him feel jolly, and a little mournful, too. He knew
that the splendid things of life are few, after all, and so very easy to
miss.





PART II. THE SONG OF THE LARK




I

THEA and Dr. Archie had been gone from Moonstone four days. On the
afternoon of the nineteenth of October they were in a street-car, riding
through the depressing, unkept wastes of North Chicago, on their way to
call upon the Reverend Lars Larsen, a friend to whom Mr. Kronborg had
written. Thea was still staying at the rooms of the Young Women's
Christian Association, and was miserable and homesick there. The
housekeeper watched her in a way that made her uncomfortable. Things had
not gone very well, so far. The noise and confusion of a big city tired
and disheartened her. She had not had her trunk sent to the Christian
Association rooms because she did not want to double cartage charges,
and now she was running up a bill for storage on it. The contents of her
gray telescope were becoming untidy, and it seemed impossible to keep
one's face and hands clean in Chicago. She felt as if she were still on
the train, traveling without enough clothes to keep clean. She wanted
another nightgown, and it did not occur to her that she could buy one.
There were other clothes in her trunk that she needed very much, and she
seemed no nearer a place to stay than when she arrived in the rain, on
that first disillusioning morning.

Dr. Archie had gone at once to his friend Hartley Evans, the throat
specialist, and had asked him to tell him of a good piano teacher and
direct him to a good boarding-house. Dr. Evans said he could easily tell
him who was the best piano teacher in Chicago, but that most students'
boarding-houses were “abominable places, where girls got poor food for body
and mind.” He gave Dr. Archie several addresses, however, and the doctor
went to look the places over. He left Thea in her room, for she seemed
tired and was not at all like herself. His inspection of boardinghouses
was not encouraging. The only place that seemed to him at all desirable
was full, and the mistress of the house could not give Thea a room in
which she could have a piano. She said Thea might use the piano in her
parlor; but when Dr. Archie went to look at the parlor he found a girl
talking to a young man on one of the corner sofas. Learning that the
boarders received all their callers there, he gave up that house, too,
as hopeless.

So when they set out to make the acquaintance of Mr. Larsen on the
afternoon he had appointed, the question of a lodging was still
undecided. The Swedish Reform Church was in a sloughy, weedy district,
near a group of factories. The church itself was a very neat little
building. The parsonage, next door, looked clean and comfortable, and
there was a well-kept yard about it, with a picket fence. Thea saw
several little children playing under a swing, and wondered why
ministers always had so many. When they rang at the parsonage door, a
capable-looking Swedish servant girl answered the bell and told them
that Mr. Larsen's study was in the church, and that he was waiting for
them there.

Mr. Larsen received them very cordially. The furniture in his study was
so new and the pictures were so heavily framed, that Thea thought it
looked more like the waiting-room of the fashionable Denver dentist to
whom Dr. Archie had taken her that summer, than like a preacher's study.
There were even flowers in a glass vase on the desk. Mr. Larsen was a
small, plump man, with a short, yellow beard, very white teeth, and a
little turned-up nose on which he wore gold-rimmed eye-glasses. He
looked about thirty-five, but he was growing bald, and his thin, hair
was parted above his left ear and brought up over the bare spot on the
top of his head. He looked cheerful and agreeable. He wore a blue coat
and no cuffs.

After Dr. Archie and Thea sat down on a slippery leather couch, the
minister asked for an outline of Thea's plans. Dr. Archie explained that
she meant to study piano with Andor Harsanyi; that they had already seen
him, that Thea had played for him and he said he would be glad to teach
her.

Mr. Larsen lifted his pale eyebrows and rubbed his plump white hands
together. “But he is a concert pianist already. He will be very
expensive.”

“That's why Miss Kronborg wants to get a church position if possible.
She has not money enough to see her through the winter. There's no use
her coming all the way from Colorado and studying with a second-rate
teacher. My friends here tell me Harsanyi is the best.”

“Oh, very likely! I have heard him play with Thomas. You Western people
do things on a big scale. There are half a dozen teachers that I should
think--However, you know what you want.” Mr. Larsen showed his contempt
for such extravagant standards by a shrug. He felt that Dr. Archie was
trying to impress him. He had succeeded, indeed, in bringing out the
doctor's stiffest manner. Mr. Larsen went on to explain that he managed
the music in his church himself, and drilled his choir, though the tenor
was the official choirmaster. Unfortunately there were no vacancies in
his choir just now. He had his four voices, very good ones. He looked
away from Dr. Archie and glanced at Thea. She looked troubled, even a
little frightened when he said this, and drew in her lower lip. She,
certainly, was not pretentious, if her protector was. He continued to
study her. She was sitting on the lounge, her knees far apart, her
gloved hands lying stiffly in her lap, like a country girl. Her turban,
which seemed a little too big for her, had got tilted in the wind,--it
was always windy in that part of Chicago,--and she looked tired. She
wore no veil, and her hair, too, was the worse for the wind and dust.
When he said he had all the voices he required, he noticed that her
gloved hands shut tightly. Mr. Larsen reflected that she was not, after
all, responsible for the lofty manner of her father's physician; that
she was not even responsible for her father, whom he remembered as a
tiresome fellow. As he watched her tired, worried face, he felt sorry
for her.

“All the same, I would like to try your voice,” he said, turning
pointedly away from her companion. “I am interested in voices. Can you
sing to the violin ?”

“I guess so,” Thea replied dully. “I don't know. I never tried.”

Mr. Larsen took his violin out of the case and began to tighten the
keys. “We might go into the lecture-room and see how it goes. I can't
tell much about a voice by the organ. The violin is really the proper
instrument to try a voice.” He opened a door at the back of his study,
pushed Thea gently through it, and looking over his shoulder to Dr.
Archie said, “Excuse us, sir. We will be back soon.”

Dr. Archie chuckled. All preachers were alike, officious and on their
dignity; liked to deal with women and girls, but not with men. He took
up a thin volume from the minister's desk. To his amusement it proved to
be a book of “Devotional and Kindred Poems; by Mrs. Aurelia S. Larsen.”
 He looked them over, thinking that the world changed very little. He
could remember when the wife of his father's minister had published a
volume of verses, which all the church members had to buy and all the
children were encouraged to read. His grandfather had made a face at the
book and said, “Puir body!” Both ladies seemed to have chosen the same
subjects, too: Jephthah's Daughter, Rizpah, David's Lament for Absalom,
etc. The doctor found the book very amusing.

The Reverend Lars Larsen was a reactionary Swede. His father came to
Iowa in the sixties, married a Swedish girl who was ambitious, like
himself, and they moved to Kansas and took up land under the Homestead
Act. After that, they bought land and leased it from the Government,
acquired land in every possible way. They worked like horses, both of
them; indeed, they would never have used any horse-flesh they owned as
they used themselves. They reared a large family and worked their sons
and daughters as mercilessly as they worked themselves; all of them but
Lars. Lars was the fourth son, and he was born lazy. He seemed to bear
the mark of overstrain on the part of his parents. Even in his cradle he
was an example of physical inertia; anything to lie still. When he was a
growing boy his mother had to drag him out of bed every morning, and he
had to be driven to his chores. At school he had a model “attendance
record,” because he found getting his lessons easier than farm work. He
was the only one of the family who went through the high school, and by
the time he graduated he had already made up his mind to study for the
ministry, because it seemed to him the least laborious of all callings.
In so far as he could see, it was the only business in which there was
practically no competition, in which a man was not all the time pitted
against other men who were willing to work themselves to death. His
father stubbornly opposed Lars's plan, but after keeping the boy at home
for a year and finding how useless he was on the farm, he sent him to a
theological seminary--as much to conceal his laziness from the neighbors
as because he did not know what else to do with him.

Larsen, like Peter Kronborg, got on well in the ministry, because he got
on well with the women. His English was no worse than that of most young
preachers of American parentage, and he made the most of his skill with
the violin. He was supposed to exert a very desirable influence over
young people and to stimulate their interest in church work. He married
an American girl, and when his father died he got his share of the
property--which was very considerable. He invested his money carefully
and was that rare thing, a preacher of independent means. His white,
well-kept hands were his result,--the evidence that he had worked out
his life successfully in the way that pleased him. His Kansas brothers
hated the sight of his hands.

Larsen liked all the softer things of life,--in so far as he knew about
them. He slept late in the morning, was fussy about his food, and read a
great many novels, preferring sentimental ones. He did not smoke, but he
ate a great deal of candy “for his throat,” and always kept a box of
chocolate drops in the upper right-hand drawer of his desk. He always
bought season tickets for the symphony concerts, and he played his
violin for women's culture clubs. He did not wear cuffs, except on
Sunday, because he believed that a free wrist facilitated his violin
practice. When he drilled his choir he always held his hand with the
little and index fingers curved higher than the other two, like a noted
German conductor he had seen. On the whole, the Reverend Larsen was not
an insincere man; he merely spent his life resting and playing, to make
up for the time his forebears had wasted grubbing in the earth. He was
simple-hearted and kind; he enjoyed his candy and his children and his
sacred cantatas. He could work energetically at almost any form of play.

Dr. Archie was deep in “The Lament of Mary Magdalen,” when Mr. Larsen
and Thea came back to the study. From the minister's expression he
judged that Thea had succeeded in interesting him.

Mr. Larsen seemed to have forgotten his hostility toward him, and
addressed him frankly as soon as he entered. He stood holding his
violin, and as Thea sat down he pointed to her with his bow:--

“I have just been telling Miss Kronborg that though I cannot promise her
anything permanent, I might give her something for the next few months.
My soprano is a young married woman and is temporarily indisposed. She
would be glad to be excused from her duties for a while. I like Miss
Kronborg's singing very much, and I think she would benefit by the
instruction in my choir. Singing here might very well lead to something
else. We pay our soprano only eight dollars a Sunday, but she always
gets ten dollars for singing at funerals. Miss Kronborg has a
sympathetic voice, and I think there would be a good deal of demand for
her at funerals. Several American churches apply to me for a soloist on
such occasions, and I could help her to pick up quite a little money
that way.”

This sounded lugubrious to Dr. Archie, who had a physician's dislike of
funerals, but he tried to accept the suggestion cordially.

“Miss Kronborg tells me she is having some trouble getting located,” Mr.
Larsen went on with animation, still holding his violin. “I would advise
her to keep away from boarding-houses altogether. Among my parishioners
there are two German women, a mother and daughter. The daughter is a
Swede by marriage, and clings to the Swedish Church. They live near
here, and they rent some of their rooms. They have now a large room
vacant, and have asked me to recommend some one. They have never taken
boarders, but Mrs. Lorch, the mother, is a good cook,--at least, I am
always glad to take supper with her,--and I think I could persuade her
to let this young woman partake of the family table. The daughter, Mrs.
Andersen, is musical, too, and sings in the Mozart Society. I think they
might like to have a music student in the house. You speak German, I
suppose ?” he turned to Thea.

“Oh, no; a few words. I don't know the grammar,” she murmured.

Dr. Archie noticed that her eyes looked alive again, not frozen as they
had looked all morning. “If this fellow can help her, it's not for me to
be stand-offish,” he said to himself.

“Do you think you would like to stay in such a quiet place, with
old-fashioned people ?” Mr. Larsen asked. “I shouldn't think you could
find a better place to work, if that's what you want.”

“I think mother would like to have me with people like that,” Thea
replied. “And I'd be glad to settle down most anywhere. I'm losing
time.”

“Very well, there's no time like the present. Let us go to see Mrs.
Lorch and Mrs. Andersen.”

The minister put his violin in its case and caught up a black-and-white
checked traveling-cap that he wore when he rode his high Columbia wheel.
The three left the church together.




II

SO Thea did not go to a boarding-house after all. When Dr. Archie left
Chicago she was comfortably settled with Mrs. Lorch, and her happy
reunion with her trunk somewhat consoled her for his departure.

Mrs. Lorch and her daughter lived half a mile from the Swedish Reform
Church, in an old square frame house, with a porch supported by frail
pillars, set in a damp yard full of big lilac bushes. The house, which
had been left over from country times, needed paint badly, and looked
gloomy and despondent among its smart Queen Anne neighbors. There was a
big back yard with two rows of apple trees and a grape arbor, and a
warped walk, two planks wide, which led to the coal bins at the back of
the lot. Thea's room was on the second floor, overlooking this back
yard, and she understood that in the winter she must carry up her own
coal and kindling from the bin. There was no furnace in the house, no
running water except in the kitchen, and that was why the room rent was
small. All the rooms were heated by stoves, and the lodgers pumped the
water they needed from the cistern under the porch, or from the well at
the entrance of the grape arbor. Old Mrs. Lorch could never bring
herself to have costly improvements made in her house; indeed she had
very little money. She preferred to keep the house just as her husband
built it, and she thought her way of living good enough for plain
people.

Thea's room was large enough to admit a rented upright piano without
crowding. It was, the widowed daughter said, “a double room that had
always before been occupied by two gentlemen”; the piano now took the
place of a second occupant. There was an ingrain carpet on the floor,
green ivy leaves on a red ground, and clumsy, old-fashioned walnut
furniture. The bed was very wide, and the mattress thin and hard. Over
the fat pillows were “shams” embroidered in Turkey red, each with a
flowering scroll--one with “Gute' Nacht,” the other with “Guten Morgen.”
 The dresser was so big that Thea wondered how it had ever been got into
the house and up the narrow stairs. Besides an old horsehair armchair,
there were two low plush “spring-rockers,” against the massive pedestals
of which one was always stumbling in the dark. Thea sat in the dark a
good deal those first weeks, and sometimes a painful bump against one of
those brutally immovable pedestals roused her temper and pulled her out
of a heavy hour. The wall-paper was brownish yellow, with blue flowers.
When it was put on, the carpet, certainly, had not been consulted. There
was only one picture on the wall when Thea moved in: a large colored
print of a brightly lighted church in a snow-storm, on Christmas Eve,
with greens hanging about the stone doorway and arched windows. There
was something warm and home, like about this picture, and Thea grew fond
of it. One day, on her way into town to take her lesson, she stopped at
a bookstore and bought a photograph of the Naples bust of Julius Caesar.
This she had framed, and hung it on the big bare wall behind her stove.
It was a curious choice, but she was at the age when people do
inexplicable things. She had been interested in Caesar's “Commentaries”
 when she left school to begin teaching, and she loved to read about
great generals; but these facts would scarcely explain her wanting that
grim bald head to share her daily existence. It seemed a strange freak,
when she bought so few things, and when she had, as Mrs. Andersen said
to Mrs. Lorch, “no pictures of the composers at all.”

Both the widows were kind to her, but Thea liked the mother better. Old
Mrs. Lorch was fat and jolly, with a red face, always shining as if she
had just come from the stove, bright little eyes, and hair of several
colors. Her own hair was one cast of iron-gray, her switch another, and
her false front still another. Her clothes always smelled of savory
cooking, except when she was dressed for church or KAFFEEKLATSCH, and
then she smelled of bay rum or of the lemon-verbena sprig which she
tucked inside her puffy black kid glove. Her cooking justified all that
Mr. Larsen had said of it, and Thea had never been so well nourished
before.

The daughter, Mrs. Andersen,--Irene, her mother called her,--was a
different sort of woman altogether. She was perhaps forty years old,
angular, big-boned, with large, thin features, light-blue eyes, and dry,
yellow hair, the bang tightly frizzed. She was pale, anaemic, and
sentimental. She had married the youngest son of a rich, arrogant
Swedish family who were lumber merchants in St. Paul. There she dwelt
during her married life. Oscar Andersen was a strong, full-blooded
fellow who had counted on a long life and had been rather careless about
his business affairs. He was killed by the explosion of a steam boiler
in the mills, and his brothers managed to prove that he had very little
stock in the big business. They had strongly disapproved of his marriage
and they agreed among themselves that they were entirely justified in
defrauding his widow, who, they said, “would only marry again and give
some fellow a good thing of it.” Mrs. Andersen would not go to law with
the family that had always snubbed and wounded her--she felt the
humiliation of being thrust out more than she felt her impoverishment;
so she went back to Chicago to live with her widowed mother on an income
of five hundred a year. This experience had given her sentimental nature
an incurable hurt. Something withered away in her. Her head had a
downward droop; her step was soft and apologetic, even in her mother's
house, and her smile had the sickly, uncertain flicker that so often
comes from a secret humiliation. She was affable and yet shrinking, like
one who has come down in the world, who has known better clothes, better
carpets, better people, brighter hopes. Her husband was buried in the
Andersen lot in St. Paul, with a locked iron fence around it. She had to
go to his eldest brother for the key when she went to say good-bye to
his grave. She clung to the Swedish Church because it had been her
husband's church.

As her mother had no room for her household belongings, Mrs. Andersen
had brought home with her only her bedroom set, which now furnished her
own room at Mrs. Lorch's. There she spent most of her time, doing
fancywork or writing letters to sympathizing German friends in St. Paul,
surrounded by keepsakes and photographs of the burly Oscar Andersen.
Thea, when she was admitted to this room, and shown these photographs,
found herself wondering, like the Andersen family, why such a lusty,
gay-looking fellow ever thought he wanted this pallid, long-cheeked
woman, whose manner was always that of withdrawing, and who must have
been rather thin-blooded even as a girl.

Mrs. Andersen was certainly a depressing person. It sometimes annoyed
Thea very much to hear her insinuating knock on the door, her flurried
explanation of why she had come, as she backed toward the stairs. Mrs.
Andersen admired Thea greatly. She thought it a distinction to be even a
“temporary soprano”--Thea called herself so quite seriously--in the
Swedish Church. She also thought it distinguished to be a pupil of
Harsanyi's. She considered Thea very handsome, very Swedish, very
talented. She fluttered about the upper floor when Thea was practicing.
In short, she tried to make a heroine of her, just as Tillie Kronborg
had always done, and Thea was conscious of something of the sort. When
she was working and heard Mrs. Andersen tip-toeing past her door, she
used to shrug her shoulders and wonder whether she was always to have a
Tillie diving furtively about her in some disguise or other.

At the dressmaker's Mrs. Andersen recalled Tillie even more painfully.
After her first Sunday in Mr. Larsen's choir, Thea saw that she must
have a proper dress for morning service. Her Moonstone party dress might
do to wear in the evening, but she must have one frock that could stand
the light of day. She, of course, knew nothing about Chicago
dressmakers, so she let Mrs. Andersen take her to a German woman whom
she recommended warmly. The German dressmaker was excitable and
dramatic. Concert dresses, she said, were her specialty. In her
fitting-room there were photographs of singers in the dresses she had
made them for this or that SANGERFEST. She and Mrs. Andersen together
achieved a costume which would have warmed Tillie Kronborg's heart. It
was clearly intended for a woman of forty, with violent tastes. There
seemed to be a piece of every known fabric in it somewhere. When it came
home, and was spread out on her huge bed, Thea looked it over and told
herself candidly that it was “a horror.” However, her money was gone,
and there was nothing to do but make the best of the dress. She never
wore it except, as she said, “to sing in,” as if it were an unbecoming
uniform. When Mrs. Lorch and Irene told her that she “looked like a
little bird-of-Paradise in it,” Thea shut her teeth and repeated to
herself words she had learned from Joe Giddy and Spanish Johnny.

In these two good women Thea found faithful friends, and in their house
she found the quiet and peace which helped her to support the great
experiences of that winter.




III

ANDOR HARSANYI had never had a pupil in the least like Thea Kronborg. He
had never had one more intelligent, and he had never had one so
ignorant. When Thea sat down to take her first lesson from him, she had
never heard a work by Beethoven or a composition by Chopin. She knew
their names vaguely. Wunsch had been a musician once, long before he
wandered into Moonstone, but when Thea awoke his interest there was not
much left of him. From him Thea had learned something about the works of
Gluck and Bach, and he used to play her some of the compositions of
Schumann. In his trunk he had a mutilated score of the F sharp minor
sonata, which he had heard Clara Schumann play at a festival in Leipsic.
Though his powers of execution were at such a low ebb, he used to play
at this sonata for his pupil and managed to give her some idea of its
beauty. When Wunsch was a young man, it was still daring to like
Schumann; enthusiasm for his work was considered an expression of
youthful waywardness. Perhaps that was why Wunsch remembered him best.
Thea studied some of the KINDERSZENEN with him, as well as some little
sonatas by Mozart and Clementi. But for the most part Wunsch stuck to
Czerny and Hummel.

Harsanyi found in Thea a pupil with sure, strong hands, one who read
rapidly and intelligently, who had, he felt, a richly gifted nature. But
she had been given no direction, and her ardor was unawakened. She had
never heard a symphony orchestra. The literature of the piano was an
undiscovered world to her. He wondered how she had been able to work so
hard when she knew so little of what she was working toward. She had
been taught according to the old Stuttgart method; stiff back, stiff
elbows, a very formal position of the hands. The best thing about her
preparation was that she had developed an unusual power of work. He
noticed at once her way of charging at difficulties. She ran to meet
them as if they were foes she had long been seeking, seized them as if
they were destined for her and she for them. Whatever she did well, she
took for granted. Her eagerness aroused all the young Hungarian's
chivalry. Instinctively one went to the rescue of a creature who had so
much to overcome and who struggled so hard. He used to tell his wife
that Miss Kronborg's hour took more out of him than half a dozen other
lessons. He usually kept her long over time; he changed her lessons
about so that he could do so, and often gave her time at the end of the
day, when he could talk to her afterward and play for her a little from
what he happened to be studying. It was always interesting to play for
her. Sometimes she was so silent that he wondered, when she left him,
whether she had got anything out of it. But a week later, two weeks
later, she would give back his idea again in a way that set him
vibrating.

All this was very well for Harsanyi; an interesting variation in the
routine of teaching. But for Thea Kronborg, that winter was almost
beyond enduring. She always remembered it as the happiest and wildest
and saddest of her life. Things came too fast for her; she had not had
enough preparation. There were times when she came home from her lesson
and lay upon her bed hating Wunsch and her family, hating a world that
had let her grow up so ignorant; when she wished that she could die then
and there, and be born over again to begin anew. She said something of
this kind once to her teacher, in the midst of a bitter struggle.
Harsanyi turned the light of his wonderful eye upon her--poor fellow, he
had but one, though that was set in such a handsome head--and said
slowly: “Every artist makes himself born. It is very much harder than
the other time, and longer. Your mother did not bring anything into the
world to play piano. That you must bring into the world yourself.”

This comforted Thea temporarily, for it seemed to give her a chance. But
a great deal of the time she was comfortless. Her letters to Dr. Archie
were brief and businesslike. She was not apt to chatter much, even in
the stimulating company of people she liked, and to chatter on paper was
simply impossible for her. If she tried to write him anything definite
about her work, she immediately scratched it out as being only partially
true, or not true at all. Nothing that she could say about her studies
seemed unqualifiedly true, once she put it down on paper.

Late one afternoon, when she was thoroughly tired and wanted to struggle
on into the dusk, Harsanyi, tired too, threw up his hands and laughed at
her. “Not to-day, Miss Kronborg. That sonata will keep; it won't run
away. Even if you and I should not waken up to-morrow, it will be
there.”

Thea turned to him fiercely. “No, it isn't here unless I have it--not
for me,” she cried passionately. “Only what I hold in my two hands is
there for me!”

Harsanyi made no reply. He took a deep breath and sat down again. “The
second movement now, quietly, with the shoulders relaxed.”

There were hours, too, of great exaltation; when she was at her best and
became a part of what she was doing and ceased to exist in any other
sense. There were other times when she was so shattered by ideas that
she could do nothing worth while; when they trampled over her like an
army and she felt as if she were bleeding to death under them. She
sometimes came home from a late lesson so exhausted that she could eat
no supper. If she tried to eat, she was ill afterward. She used to throw
herself upon the bed and lie there in the dark, not thinking, not
feeling, but evaporating. That same night, perhaps, she would waken up
rested and calm, and as she went over her work in her mind, the passages
seemed to become something of themselves, to take a sort of pattern in
the darkness. She had never learned to work away from the piano until
she came to Harsanyi, and it helped her more than anything had ever
helped her before.

She almost never worked now with the sunny, happy contentment that had
filled the hours when she worked with Wunsch--“like a fat horse turning
a sorgum mill,” she said bitterly to herself. Then, by sticking to it,
she could always do what she set out to do. Now, everything that she
really wanted was impossible; a CANTABILE like Harsanyi's, for instance,
instead of her own cloudy tone. No use telling her she might have it in
ten years. She wanted it now. She wondered how she had ever found other
things interesting: books, “Anna Karenina”--all that seemed so unreal
and on the outside of things. She was not born a musician, she decided;
there was no other way of explaining it.

Sometimes she got so nervous at the piano that she left it, and
snatching up her hat and cape went out and walked, hurrying through the
streets like Christian fleeing from the City of Destruction. And while
she walked she cried. There was scarcely a street in the neighborhood
that she had not cried up and down before that winter was over. The
thing that used to lie under her cheek, that sat so warmly over her
heart when she glided away from the sand hills that autumn morning, was
far from her. She had come to Chicago to be with it, and it had deserted
her, leaving in its place a painful longing, an unresigned despair.


Harsanyi knew that his interesting pupil--“the savage blonde,” one of
his male students called her--was sometimes very unhappy. He saw in her
discontent a curious definition of character. He would have said that a
girl with so much musical feeling, so intelligent, with good training of
eye and hand, would, when thus suddenly introduced to the great
literature of the piano, have found boundless happiness. But he soon
learned that she was not able to forget her own poverty in the richness
of the world he opened to her. Often when he played to her, her face was
the picture of restless misery. She would sit crouching forward, her
elbows on her knees, her brows drawn together and her gray-green eyes
smaller than ever, reduced to mere pin-points of cold, piercing light.
Sometimes, while she listened, she would swallow hard, two or three
times, and look nervously from left to right, drawing her shoulders
together. “Exactly,” he thought, “as if she were being watched, or as if
she were naked and heard some one coming.”

On the other hand, when she came several times to see Mrs. Harsanyi and
the two babies, she was like a little girl, jolly and gay and eager to
play with the children, who loved her. The little daughter, Tanya, liked
to touch Miss Kronborg's yellow hair and pat it, saying, “Dolly, dolly,”
 because it was of a color much oftener seen on dolls than on people. But
if Harsanyi opened the piano and sat down to play, Miss Kronborg
gradually drew away from the children, retreated to a corner and became
sullen or troubled. Mrs. Harsanyi noticed this, also, and thought it
very strange behavior.

Another thing that puzzled Harsanyi was Thea's apparent lack of
curiosity. Several times he offered to give her tickets to concerts, but
she said she was too tired or that it “knocked her out to be up late.”
 Harsanyi did not know that she was singing in a choir, and had often to
sing at funerals, neither did he realize how much her work with him
stirred her and exhausted her. Once, just as she was leaving his studio,
he called her back and told her he could give her some tickets that had
been sent him for Emma Juch that evening. Thea fingered the black wool
on the edge of her plush cape and replied, “Oh, thank you, Mr. Harsanyi,
but I have to wash my hair to-night.”

Mrs. Harsanyi liked Miss Kronborg thoroughly. She saw in her the making
of a pupil who would reflect credit upon Harsanyi. She felt that the
girl could be made to look strikingly handsome, and that she had the
kind of personality which takes hold of audiences. Moreover, Miss
Kronborg was not in the least sentimental about her husband. Sometimes
from the show pupils one had to endure a good deal. “I like that girl,”
 she used to say, when Harsanyi told her of one of Thea's GAUCHERIES.
“She doesn't sigh every time the wind blows. With her one swallow
doesn't make a summer.”

Thea told them very little about herself. She was not naturally
communicative, and she found it hard to feel confidence in new people.
She did not know why, but she could not talk to Harsanyi as she could to
Dr. Archie, or to Johnny and Mrs. Tellamantez. With Mr. Larsen she felt
more at home, and when she was walking she sometimes stopped at his
study to eat candy with him or to hear the plot of the novel he happened
to be reading.

One evening toward the middle of December Thea was to dine with the
Harsanyis. She arrived early, to have time to play with the children
before they went to bed. Mrs. Harsanyi took her into her own room and
helped her take off her country “fascinator” and her clumsy plush cape.
Thea had bought this cape at a big department store and had paid $16.50
for it. As she had never paid more than ten dollars for a coat before,
that seemed to her a large price. It was very heavy and not very warm,
ornamented with a showy pattern in black disks, and trimmed around the
collar and the edges with some kind of black wool that “crocked” badly
in snow or rain. It was lined with a cotton stuff called “farmer's
satin.” Mrs. Harsanyi was one woman in a thousand. As she lifted this
cape from Thea's shoulders and laid it on her white bed, she wished that
her husband did not have to charge pupils like this one for their
lessons. Thea wore her Moonstone party dress, white organdie, made with
a “V” neck and elbow sleeves, and a blue sash. She looked very pretty in
it, and around her throat she had a string of pink coral and tiny white
shells that Ray once brought her from Los Angeles. Mrs. Harsanyi noticed
that she wore high heavy shoes which needed blacking. The choir in Mr.
Larsen's church stood behind a railing, so Thea did not pay much
attention to her shoes.

“You have nothing to do to your hair,” Mrs. Harsanyi said kindly, as
Thea turned to the mirror. “However it happens to lie, it's always
pretty. I admire it as much as Tanya does.”

Thea glanced awkwardly away from her and looked stern, but Mrs. Harsanyi
knew that she was pleased. They went into the living-room, behind the
studio, where the two children were playing on the big rug before the
coal grate. Andor, the boy, was six, a sturdy, handsome child, and the
little girl was four. She came tripping to meet Thea, looking like a
little doll in her white net dress--her mother made all her clothes.
Thea picked her up and hugged her. Mrs. Harsanyi excused herself and
went to the dining-room. She kept only one maid and did a good deal of
the housework herself, besides cooking her husband's favorite dishes for
him. She was still under thirty, a slender, graceful woman, gracious,
intelligent, and capable. She adapted herself to circumstances with a
well-bred ease which solved many of her husband's difficulties, and kept
him, as he said, from feeling cheap and down at the heel. No musician
ever had a better wife. Unfortunately her beauty was of a very frail and
impressionable kind, and she was beginning to lose it. Her face was too
thin now, and there were often dark circles under her eyes.

Left alone with the children, Thea sat down on Tanya's little chair--she
would rather have sat on the floor, but was afraid of rumpling her
dress--and helped them play “cars” with Andor's iron railway set. She
showed him new ways to lay his tracks and how to make switches, set up
his Noah's ark village for stations and packed the animals in the open
coal cars to send them to the stockyards. They worked out their shipment
so realistically that when Andor put the two little reindeer into the
stock car, Tanya snatched them out and began to cry, saying she wasn't
going to have all their animals killed.

Harsanyi came in, jaded and tired, and asked Thea to go on with her
game, as he was not equal to talking much before dinner. He sat down and
made pretense of glancing at the evening paper, but he soon dropped it.
After the railroad began to grow tiresome, Thea went with the children
to the lounge in the corner, and played for them the game with which she
used to amuse Thor for hours together behind the parlor stove at home,
making shadow pictures against the wall with her hands. Her fingers were
very supple, and she could make a duck and a cow and a sheep and a fox
and a rabbit and even an elephant. Harsanyi, from his low chair, watched
them, smiling. The boy was on his knees, jumping up and down with the
excitement of guessing the beasts, and Tanya sat with her feet tucked
under her and clapped her frail little hands. Thea's profile, in the
lamplight, teased his fancy. Where had he seen a head like it before ?

When dinner was announced, little Andor took Thea's hand and walked to
the dining-room with her. The children always had dinner with their
parents and behaved very nicely at table. “Mamma,” said Andor seriously
as he climbed into his chair and tucked his napkin into the collar of
his blouse, “Miss Kronborg's hands are every kind of animal there is.”

His father laughed. “I wish somebody would say that about my hands,
Andor.”

When Thea dined at the Harsanyis before, she noticed that there was an
intense suspense from the moment they took their places at the table
until the master of the house had tasted the soup. He had a theory that
if the soup went well, the dinner would go well; but if the soup was
poor, all was lost. To-night he tasted his soup and smiled, and Mrs.
Harsanyi sat more easily in her chair and turned her attention to Thea.
Thea loved their dinner table, because it was lighted by candles in
silver candle-sticks, and she had never seen a table so lighted anywhere
else. There were always flowers, too. To-night there was a little orange
tree, with oranges on it, that one of Harsanyi's pupils had sent him at
Thanksgiving time. After Harsanyi had finished his soup and a glass of
red Hungarian wine, he lost his fagged look and became cordial and
witty. He persuaded Thea to drink a little wine to-night. The first time
she dined with them, when he urged her to taste the glass of sherry
beside her plate, she astonished them by telling them that she “never
drank.”

Harsanyi was then a man of thirty-two. He was to have a very brilliant
career, but he did not know it then. Theodore Thomas was perhaps the
only man in Chicago who felt that Harsanyi might have a great future.
Harsanyi belonged to the softer Slavic type, and was more like a Pole
than a Hungarian. He was tall, slender, active, with sloping, graceful
shoulders and long arms. His head was very fine, strongly and delicately
modelled, and, as Thea put it, “so independent.” A lock of his thick
brown hair usually hung over his forehead. His eye was wonderful; full
of light and fire when he was interested, soft and thoughtful when he
was tired or melancholy. The meaning and power of two very fine eyes
must all have gone into this one--the right one, fortunately, the one
next his audience when he played. He believed that the glass eye which
gave one side of his face such a dull, blind look, had ruined his
career, or rather had made a career impossible for him. Harsanyi lost
his eye when he was twelve years old, in a Pennsylvania mining town
where explosives happened to be kept too near the frame shanties in
which the company packed newly arrived Hungarian families.

His father was a musician and a good one, but he had cruelly over-worked
the boy; keeping him at the piano for six hours a day and making him
play in cafes and dance halls for half the night. Andor ran away and
crossed the ocean with an uncle, who smuggled him through the port as
one of his own many children. The explosion in which Andor was hurt
killed a score of people, and he was thought lucky to get off with an
eye. He still had a clipping from a Pittsburg paper, giving a list of
the dead and injured. He appeared as “Harsanyi, Andor, left eye and
slight injuries about the head.” That was his first American “notice”;
and he kept it. He held no grudge against the coal company; he
understood that the accident was merely one of the things that are bound
to happen in the general scramble of American life, where every one
comes to grab and takes his chance.

While they were eating dessert, Thea asked Harsanyi if she could change
her Tuesday lesson from afternoon to morning. “I have to be at a choir
rehearsal in the afternoon, to get ready for the Christmas music, and I
expect it will last until late.”

Harsanyi put down his fork and looked up. “A choir rehearsal ? You sing
in a church ?”

“Yes. A little Swedish church, over on the North side.”

“Why did you not tell us ?”

“Oh, I'm only a temporary. The regular soprano is not well.”

“How long have you been singing there ?”

“Ever since I came. I had to get a position of some kind,” Thea
explained, flushing, “and the preacher took me on. He runs the choir
himself. He knew my father, and I guess he took me to oblige.”

Harsanyi tapped the tablecloth with the ends of his fingers. “But why
did you never tell us ? Why are you so reticent with us ?”

Thea looked shyly at him from under her brows. “Well, it's certainly not
very interesting. It's only a little church. I only do it for business
reasons.”

“What do you mean ? Don't you like to sing ? Don't you sing well ?”

“I like it well enough, but, of course, I don't know anything about
singing. I guess that's why I never said anything about it. Anybody
that's got a voice can sing in a little church like that.”

Harsanyi laughed softly--a little scornfully, Thea thought. “So you have
a voice, have you ?”

Thea hesitated, looked intently at the candles and then at Harsanyi.
“Yes,” she said firmly; “I have got some, anyway.”

“Good girl,” said Mrs. Harsanyi, nodding and smiling at Thea. “You must
let us hear you sing after dinner.”

This remark seemingly closed the subject, and when the coffee was
brought they began to talk of other things. Harsanyi asked Thea how she
happened to know so much about the way in which freight trains are
operated, and she tried to give him some idea of how the people in
little desert towns live by the railway and order their lives by the
coming and going of the trains. When they left the diningroom the
children were sent to bed and Mrs. Harsanyi took Thea into the studio.
She and her husband usually sat there in the evening.

Although their apartment seemed so elegant to Thea, it was small and
cramped. The studio was the only spacious room. The Harsanyis were poor,
and it was due to Mrs. Harsanyi's good management that their lives, even
in hard times, moved along with dignity and order. She had long ago
found out that bills or debts of any kind frightened her husband and
crippled his working power. He said they were like bars on the windows,
and shut out the future; they meant that just so many hundred dollars'
worth of his life was debilitated and exhausted before he got to it. So
Mrs. Harsanyi saw to it that they never owed anything. Harsanyi was not
extravagant, though he was sometimes careless about money. Quiet and
order and his wife's good taste were the things that meant most to him.
After these, good food, good cigars, a little good wine. He wore his
clothes until they were shabby, until his wife had to ask the tailor to
come to the house and measure him for new ones. His neckties she usually
made herself, and when she was in shops she always kept her eye open for
silks in very dull or pale shades, grays and olives, warm blacks and
browns.

When they went into the studio Mrs. Harsanyi took up her embroidery and
Thea sat down beside her on a low stool, her hands clasped about her
knees. While his wife and his pupil talked, Harsanyi sank into a CHAISE
LONGUE in which he sometimes snatched a few moments' rest between his
lessons, and smoked. He sat well out of the circle of the lamplight, his
feet to the fire. His feet were slender and well shaped, always
elegantly shod. Much of the grace of his movements was due to the fact
that his feet were almost as sure and flexible as his hands. He listened
to the conversation with amusement. He admired his wife's tact and
kindness with crude young people; she taught them so much without
seeming to be instructing. When the clock struck nine, Thea said she
must be going home.

Harsanyi rose and flung away his cigarette. “Not yet. We have just begun
the evening. Now you are going to sing for us. I have been waiting for
you to recover from dinner. Come, what shall it be ?” he crossed to the
piano.

Thea laughed and shook her head, locking her elbows still tighter about
her knees. “Thank you, Mr. Harsanyi, but if you really make me sing,
I'll accompany myself. You couldn't stand it to play the sort of things
I have to sing.”

As Harsanyi still pointed to the chair at the piano, she left her stool
and went to it, while he returned to his CHAISE LONGUE. Thea looked at
the keyboard uneasily for a moment, then she began “Come, ye
Disconsolate,” the hymn Wunsch had always liked to hear her sing. Mrs.
Harsanyi glanced questioningly at her husband, but he was looking
intently at the toes of his boots, shading his forehead with his long
white hand. When Thea finished the hymn she did not turn around, but
immediately began “The Ninety and Nine.” Mrs. Harsanyi kept trying to
catch her husband's eye; but his chin only sank lower on his collar.


“There were ninety and nine that safely lay In the shelter of the fold,
But one was out on the hills away, Far off from the gates of gold.”


Harsanyi looked at her, then back at the fire.

“Rejoice, for the Shepherd has found his sheep.”

Thea turned on the chair and grinned. “That's about enough, isn't it ?
That song got me my job. The preacher said it was sympathetic,” she
minced the word, remembering Mr. Larsen's manner.

Harsanyi drew himself up in his chair, resting his elbows on the low
arms. “Yes ? That is better suited to your voice. Your upper tones are
good, above G. I must teach you some songs. Don't you know
anything--pleasant ?”

Thea shook her head ruefully. “I'm afraid I don't. Let me see--Perhaps,”
 she turned to the piano and put her hands on the keys. “I used to sing
this for Mr. Wunsch a long while ago. It's for contralto, but I'll try
it.” She frowned at the keyboard a moment, played the few introductory
measures, and began:

“ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN,”

She had not sung it for a long time, and it came back like an old
friendship. When she finished, Harsanyi sprang from his chair and
dropped lightly upon his toes, a kind of ENTRE-CHAT that he sometimes
executed when he formed a sudden resolution, or when he was about to
follow a pure intuition, against reason. His wife said that when he gave
that spring he was shot from the bow of his ancestors, and now when he
left his chair in that manner she knew he was intensely interested. He
went quickly to the piano.

“Sing that again. There is nothing the matter with your low voice, my
girl. I will play for you. Let your voice out.” Without looking at her
he began the accompaniment. Thea drew back her shoulders, relaxed them
instinctively, and sang.

When she finished the aria, Harsanyi beckoned her nearer. “Sing AH--AH
for me, as I indicate.” He kept his right hand on the keyboard and put
his left to her throat, placing the tips of his delicate fingers over
her larynx. “Again,--until your breath is gone.--Trill between the two
tones, always; good! Again; excellent!--Now up,--stay there. E and F.
Not so good, is it ? F is always a hard one.--Now, try the
half-tone.--That's right, nothing difficult about it.--Now, pianissimo,
AH--AH. Now, swell it, AH--AH.--Again, follow my hand.--Now, carry it
down.--Anybody ever tell you anything about your breathing ?”

“Mr. Larsen says I have an unusually long breath,” Thea replied with
spirit.

Harsanyi smiled. “So you have, so you have. That was what I meant. Now,
once more; carry it up and then down, AH--AH.” He put his hand back to
her throat and sat with his head bent, his one eye closed. He loved to
hear a big voice throb in a relaxed, natural throat, and he was thinking
that no one had ever felt this voice vibrate before. It was like a wild
bird that had flown into his studio on Middleton Street from goodness
knew how far! No one knew that it had come, or even that it existed;
least of all the strange, crude girl in whose throat it beat its
passionate wings. What a simple thing it was, he reflected; why had he
never guessed it before ? Everything about her indicated it,--the big
mouth, the wide jaw and chin, the strong white teeth, the deep laugh.
The machine was so simple and strong, seemed to be so easily operated.
She sang from the bottom of herself. Her breath came from down where her
laugh came from, the deep laugh which Mrs. Harsanyi had once called “the
laugh of the people.” A relaxed throat, a voice that lay on the breath,
that had never been forced off the breath; it rose and fell in the
air-column like the little balls which are put to shine in the jet of a
fountain. The voice did not thin as it went up; the upper tones were as
full and rich as the lower, produced in the same way and as
unconsciously, only with deeper breath.

At last Harsanyi threw back his head and rose. “You must be tired, Miss
Kronborg.”

When she replied, she startled him; he had forgotten how hard and full
of burs her speaking voice was. “No,” she said, “singing never tires
me.”

Harsanyi pushed back his hair with a nervous hand. “I don't know much
about the voice, but I shall take liberties and teach you some good
songs. I think you have a very interesting voice.”

“I'm glad if you like it. Good-night, Mr. Harsanyi.” Thea went with Mrs.
Harsanyi to get her wraps.

When Mrs. Harsanyi came back to her husband, she found him walking
restlessly up and down the room.

“Don't you think her voice wonderful, dear ?” she asked.

“I scarcely know what to think. All I really know about that girl is
that she tires me to death. We must not have her often. If I did not
have my living to make, then--” he dropped into a chair and closed his
eyes. “How tired I am. What a voice!”




IV

AFTER that evening Thea's work with Harsanyi changed somewhat. He
insisted that she should study some songs with him, and after almost
every lesson he gave up half an hour of his own time to practicing them
with her. He did not pretend to know much about voice production, but so
far, he thought, she had acquired no really injurious habits. A healthy
and powerful organ had found its own method, which was not a bad one. He
wished to find out a good deal before he recommended a vocal teacher. He
never told Thea what he thought about her voice, and made her general
ignorance of anything worth singing his pretext for the trouble he took.
That was in the beginning. After the first few lessons his own pleasure
and hers were pretext enough. The singing came at the end of the lesson
hour, and they both treated it as a form of relaxation.

Harsanyi did not say much even to his wife about his discovery. He
brooded upon it in a curious way. He found that these unscientific
singing lessons stimulated him in his own study. After Miss Kronborg
left him he often lay down in his studio for an hour before dinner, with
his head full of musical ideas, with an effervescence in his brain which
he had sometimes lost for weeks together under the grind of teaching. He
had never got so much back for himself from any pupil as he did from
Miss Kronborg. From the first she had stimulated him; something in her
personality invariably affected him. Now that he was feeling his way
toward her voice, he found her more interesting than ever before. She
lifted the tedium of the winter for him, gave him curious fancies and
reveries. Musically, she was sympathetic to him. Why all this was true,
he never asked himself. He had learned that one must take where and when
one can the mysterious mental irritant that rouses one's imagination;
that it is not to be had by order. She often wearied him, but she never
bored him. Under her crudeness and brusque hardness, he felt there was a
nature quite different, of which he never got so much as a hint except
when she was at the piano, or when she sang. It was toward this hidden
creature that he was trying, for his own pleasure, to find his way. In
short, Harsanyi looked forward to his hour with Thea for the same reason
that poor Wunsch had sometimes dreaded his; because she stirred him more
than anything she did could adequately explain.

One afternoon Harsanyi, after the lesson, was standing by the window
putting some collodion on a cracked finger, and Thea was at the piano
trying over “Die Lorelei” which he had given her last week to practice.
It was scarcely a song which a singing master would have given her, but
he had his own reasons. How she sang it mattered only to him and to her.
He was playing his own game now, without interference; he suspected that
he could not do so always.

When she finished the song, she looked back over her shoulder at him and
spoke thoughtfully. “That wasn't right, at the end, was it ?”

“No, that should be an open, flowing tone, something like this,”--he
waved his fingers rapidly in the air. “You get the idea ?”

“No, I don't. Seems a queer ending, after the rest.”

Harsanyi corked his little bottle and dropped it into the pocket of his
velvet coat. “Why so ? Shipwrecks come and go, MARCHEN come and go, but
the river keeps right on. There you have your open, flowing tone.”

Thea looked intently at the music. “I see,” she said dully. “Oh, I see!”
 she repeated quickly and turned to him a glowing countenance. “It is the
river.--Oh, yes, I get it now!” She looked at him but long enough to
catch his glance, then turned to the piano again. Harsanyi was never
quite sure where the light came from when her face suddenly flashed out
at him in that way. Her eyes were too small to account for it, though
they glittered like green ice in the sun. At such moments her hair was
yellower, her skin whiter, her cheeks pinker, as if a lamp had suddenly
been turned up inside of her. She went at the song again:


“ICH WEISS NICHT, WAS SOLL ES BEDEUTEN, DAS ICH SO TRAURIG BIN.”


A kind of happiness vibrated in her voice. Harsanyi noticed how much and
how unhesitatingly she changed her delivery of the whole song, the first
part as well as the last. He had often noticed that she could not think
a thing out in passages. Until she saw it as a whole, she wandered like
a blind man surrounded by torments. After she once had her “revelation,”
 after she got the idea that to her--not always to him--explained
everything, then she went forward rapidly. But she was not always easy
to help. She was sometimes impervious to suggestion; she would stare at
him as if she were deaf and ignore everything he told her to do. Then,
all at once, something would happen in her brain and she would begin to
do all that he had been for weeks telling her to do, without realizing
that he had ever told her.

To-night Thea forgot Harsanyi and his finger. She finished the song only
to begin it with fresh enthusiasm.


“UND DAS HAT MIT IHREM SINGEN DIE LORELEI GETHAN.”


She sat there singing it until the darkening room was so flooded with it
that Harsanyi threw open a window.

“You really must stop it, Miss Kronborg. I shan't be able to get it out
of my head to-night.”

Thea laughed tolerantly as she began to gather up her music. “Why, I
thought you had gone, Mr. Harsanyi. I like that song.”

That evening at dinner Harsanyi sat looking intently into a glass of
heavy yellow wine; boring into it, indeed, with his one eye, when his
face suddenly broke into a smile.

“What is it, Andor ?” his wife asked.

He smiled again, this time at her, and took up the nutcrackers and a
Brazil nut. “Do you know,” he said in a tone so intimate and
confidential that he might have been speaking to himself,--“do you know,
I like to see Miss Kronborg get hold of an idea. In spite of being so
talented, she's not quick. But when she does get an idea, it fills her
up to the eyes. She had my room so reeking of a song this afternoon that
I couldn't stay there.”

Mrs. Harsanyi looked up quickly, “'Die Lorelei,' you mean ? One couldn't
think of anything else anywhere in the house. I thought she was
possessed. But don't you think her voice is wonderful sometimes ?”

Harsanyi tasted his wine slowly. “My dear, I've told you before that I
don't know what I think about Miss Kronborg, except that I'm glad there
are not two of her. I sometimes wonder whether she is not glad. Fresh as
she is at it all, I've occasionally fancied that, if she knew how, she
would like to--diminish.” He moved his left hand out into the air as if
he were suggesting a DIMINUENDO to an orchestra.




V

BY the first of February Thea had been in Chicago almost four months,
and she did not know much more about the city than if she had never
quitted Moonstone. She was, as Harsanyi said, incurious. Her work took
most of her time, and she found that she had to sleep a good deal. It
had never before been so hard to get up in the morning. She had the
bother of caring for her room, and she had to build her fire and bring
up her coal. Her routine was frequently interrupted by a message from
Mr. Larsen summoning her to sing at a funeral. Every funeral took half a
day, and the time had to be made up. When Mrs. Harsanyi asked her if it
did not depress her to sing at funerals, she replied that she “had been
brought up to go to funerals and didn't mind.”

Thea never went into shops unless she had to, and she felt no interest
in them. Indeed, she shunned them, as places where one was sure to be
parted from one's money in some way. She was nervous about counting her
change, and she could not accustom herself to having her purchases sent
to her address. She felt much safer with her bundles under her arm.

During this first winter Thea got no city consciousness. Chicago was
simply a wilderness through which one had to find one's way. She felt no
interest in the general briskness and zest of the crowds. The crash and
scramble of that big, rich, appetent Western city she did not take in at
all, except to notice that the noise of the drays and street-cars tired
her. The brilliant window displays, the splendid furs and stuffs, the
gorgeous flower-shops, the gay candy-shops, she scarcely noticed. At
Christmas-time she did feel some curiosity about the toy-stores, and she
wished she held Thor's little mittened fist in her hand as she stood
before the windows. The jewelers' windows, too, had a strong attraction
for her--she had always liked bright stones. When she went into the city
she used to brave the biting lake winds and stand gazing in at the
displays of diamonds and pearls and emeralds; the tiaras and necklaces
and earrings, on white velvet. These seemed very well worth while to
her, things worth coveting.

Mrs. Lorch and Mrs. Andersen often told each other it was strange that
Miss Kronborg had so little initiative about “visiting points of
interest.” When Thea came to live with them she had expressed a wish to
see two places: Montgomery Ward and Company's big mail-order store, and
the packing-houses, to which all the hogs and cattle that went through
Moonstone were bound. One of Mrs. Lorch's lodgers worked in a
packing-house, and Mrs. Andersen brought Thea word that she had spoken
to Mr. Eckman and he would gladly take her to Packingtown. Eckman was a
toughish young Swede, and he thought it would be something of a lark to
take a pretty girl through the slaughter-houses. But he was
disappointed. Thea neither grew faint nor clung to the arm he kept
offering her. She asked innumerable questions and was impatient because
he knew so little of what was going on outside of his own department.
When they got off the street-car and walked back to Mrs. Lorch's house
in the dusk, Eckman put her hand in his overcoat pocket--she had no
muff--and kept squeezing it ardently until she said, “Don't do that; my
ring cuts me.” That night he told his roommate that he “could have
kissed her as easy as rolling off a log, but she wasn't worth the
trouble.” As for Thea, she had enjoyed the afternoon very much, and
wrote her father a brief but clear account of what she had seen.

One night at supper Mrs. Andersen was talking about the exhibit of
students' work she had seen at the Art Institute that afternoon. Several
of her friends had sketches in the exhibit. Thea, who always felt that
she was behindhand in courtesy to Mrs. Andersen, thought that here was
an opportunity to show interest without committing herself to anything.
“Where is that, the Institute ?” she asked absently.

Mrs. Andersen clasped her napkin in both hands. “The Art Institute ? Our
beautiful Art Institute on Michigan Avenue ? Do you mean to say you have
never visited it ?”

“Oh, is it the place with the big lions out in front ? I remember; I saw
it when I went to Montgomery Ward's. Yes, I thought the lions were
beautiful.”

“But the pictures! Didn't you visit the galleries ?”

“No. The sign outside said it was a pay-day. I've always meant to go
back, but I haven't happened to be down that way since.”

Mrs. Lorch and Mrs. Andersen looked at each other. The old mother spoke,
fixing her shining little eyes upon Thea across the table. “Ah, but Miss
Kronborg, there are old masters! Oh, many of them, such as you could not
see anywhere out of Europe.”

“And Corots,” breathed Mrs. Andersen, tilting her head feelingly. “Such
examples of the Barbizon school!” This was meaningless to Thea, who did
not read the art columns of the Sunday INTER-OCEAN as Mrs. Andersen did.

“Oh, I'm going there some day,” she reassured them. “I like to look at
oil paintings.”

One bleak day in February, when the wind was blowing clouds of dirt like
a Moonstone sandstorm, dirt that filled your eyes and ears and mouth,
Thea fought her way across the unprotected space in front of the Art
Institute and into the doors of the building. She did not come out again
until the closing hour. In the street-car, on the long cold ride home,
while she sat staring at the waistcoat buttons of a fat strap-hanger,
she had a serious reckoning with herself. She seldom thought about her
way of life, about what she ought or ought not to do; usually there was
but one obvious and important thing to be done. But that afternoon she
remonstrated with herself severely. She told herself that she was
missing a great deal; that she ought to be more willing to take advice
and to go to see things. She was sorry that she had let months pass
without going to the Art Institute. After this she would go once a week.

The Institute proved, indeed, a place of retreat, as the sand hills or
the Kohlers' garden used to be; a place where she could forget Mrs.
Andersen's tiresome overtures of friendship, the stout contralto in the
choir whom she so unreasonably hated, and even, for a little while, the
torment of her work. That building was a place in which she could relax
and play, and she could hardly ever play now. On the whole, she spent
more time with the casts than with the pictures. They were at once more
simple and more perplexing; and some way they seemed more important,
harder to overlook. It never occurred to her to buy a catalogue, so she
called most of the casts by names she made up for them. Some of them she
knew; the Dying Gladiator she had read about in “Childe Harold” almost
as long ago as she could remember; he was strongly associated with Dr.
Archie and childish illnesses. The Venus di Milo puzzled her; she could
not see why people thought her so beautiful. She told herself over and
over that she did not think the Apollo Belvedere “at all handsome.”
 Better than anything else she liked a great equestrian statue of an
evil, cruel-looking general with an unpronounceable name. She used to
walk round and round this terrible man and his terrible horse, frowning
at him, brooding upon him, as if she had to make some momentous decision
about him.

The casts, when she lingered long among them, always made her gloomy. It
was with a lightening of the heart, a feeling of throwing off the old
miseries and old sorrows of the world, that she ran up the wide
staircase to the pictures. There she liked best the ones that told
stories. There was a painting by Gerome called “The Pasha's Grief” which
always made her wish for Gunner and Axel. The Pasha was seated on a rug,
beside a green candle almost as big as a telegraph pole, and before him
was stretched his dead tiger, a splendid beast, and there were pink
roses scattered about him. She loved, too, a picture of some boys
bringing in a newborn calf on a litter, the cow walking beside it and
licking it. The Corot which hung next to this painting she did not like
or dislike; she never saw it.

But in that same room there was a picture--oh, that was the thing she
ran upstairs so fast to see! That was her picture. She imagined that
nobody cared for it but herself, and that it waited for her. That was a
picture indeed. She liked even the name of it, “The Song of the Lark.”
 The flat country, the early morning light, the wet fields, the look in
the girl's heavy face--well, they were all hers, anyhow, whatever was
there. She told herself that that picture was “right.” Just what she
meant by this, it would take a clever person to explain. But to her the
word covered the almost boundless satisfaction she felt when she looked
at the picture.


Before Thea had any idea how fast the weeks were flying, before Mr.
Larsen's “permanent” soprano had returned to her duties, spring came;
windy, dusty, strident, shrill; a season almost more violent in Chicago
than the winter from which it releases one, or the heat to which it
eventually delivers one. One sunny morning the apple trees in Mrs.
Lorch's back yard burst into bloom, and for the first time in months
Thea dressed without building a fire. The morning shone like a holiday,
and for her it was to be a holiday. There was in the air that sudden,
treacherous softness which makes the Poles who work in the
packing-houses get drunk. At such times beauty is necessary, and in
Packingtown there is no place to get it except at the saloons, where one
can buy for a few hours the illusion of comfort, hope, love,--whatever
one most longs for.

Harsanyi had given Thea a ticket for the symphony concert that
afternoon, and when she looked out at the white apple trees her doubts
as to whether she ought to go vanished at once. She would make her work
light that morning, she told herself. She would go to the concert full
of energy. When she set off, after dinner, Mrs. Lorch, who knew Chicago
weather, prevailed upon her to take her cape. The old lady said that
such sudden mildness, so early in April, presaged a sharp return of
winter, and she was anxious about her apple trees.

The concert began at two-thirty, and Thea was in her seat in the
Auditorium at ten minutes after two--a fine seat in the first row of the
balcony, on the side, where she could see the house as well as the
orchestra. She had been to so few concerts that the great house, the
crowd of people, and the lights, all had a stimulating effect. She was
surprised to see so many men in the audience, and wondered how they
could leave their business in the afternoon. During the first number
Thea was so much interested in the orchestra itself, in the men, the
instruments, the volume of sound, that she paid little attention to what
they were playing. Her excitement impaired her power of listening. She
kept saying to herself, “Now I must stop this foolishness and listen; I
may never hear this again”; but her mind was like a glass that is hard
to focus. She was not ready to listen until the second number, Dvorak's
Symphony in E minor, called on the programme, “From the New World.” The
first theme had scarcely been given out when her mind became clear;
instant composure fell upon her, and with it came the power of
concentration. This was music she could understand, music from the New
World indeed! Strange how, as the first movement went on, it brought
back to her that high tableland above Laramie; the grass-grown wagon
trails, the far-away peaks of the snowy range, the wind and the eagles,
that old man and the first telegraph message.

When the first movement ended, Thea's hands and feet were cold as ice.
She was too much excited to know anything except that she wanted
something desperately, and when the English horns gave out the theme of
the Largo, she knew that what she wanted was exactly that. Here were the
sand hills, the grasshoppers and locusts, all the things that wakened
and chirped in the early morning; the reaching and reaching of high
plains, the immeasurable yearning of all flat lands. There was home in
it, too; first memories, first mornings long ago; the amazement of a new
soul in a new world; a soul new and yet old, that had dreamed something
despairing, something glorious, in the dark before it was born; a soul
obsessed by what it did not know, under the cloud of a past it could not
recall.

If Thea had had much experience in concert-going, and had known her own
capacity, she would have left the hall when the symphony was over. But
she sat still, scarcely knowing where she was, because her mind had been
far away and had not yet come back to her. She was startled when the
orchestra began to play again--the entry of the gods into Walhalla. She
heard it as people hear things in their sleep. She knew scarcely
anything about the Wagner operas. She had a vague idea that “Rhinegold”
 was about the strife between gods and men; she had read something about
it in Mr. Haweis's book long ago. Too tired to follow the orchestra with
much understanding, she crouched down in her seat and closed her eyes.
The cold, stately measures of the Walhalla music rang out, far away; the
rainbow bridge throbbed out into the air, under it the wailing of the
Rhine daughters and the singing of the Rhine. But Thea was sunk in
twilight; it was all going on in another world. So it happened that with
a dull, almost listless ear she heard for the first time that troubled
music, ever-darkening, ever-brightening, which was to flow through so
many years of her life.

When Thea emerged from the concert hall, Mrs. Lorch's predictions had
been fulfilled. A furious gale was beating over the city from Lake
Michigan. The streets were full of cold, hurrying, angry people, running
for street-cars and barking at each other. The sun was setting in a
clear, windy sky, that flamed with red as if there were a great fire
somewhere on the edge of the city. For almost the first time Thea was
conscious of the city itself, of the congestion of life all about her,
of the brutality and power of those streams that flowed in the streets,
threatening to drive one under. People jostled her, ran into her, poked
her aside with their elbows, uttering angry exclamations. She got on the
wrong car and was roughly ejected by the conductor at a windy corner, in
front of a saloon. She stood there dazed and shivering. The cars passed,
screaming as they rounded curves, but either they were full to the
doors, or were bound for places where she did not want to go. Her hands
were so cold that she took off her tight kid gloves. The street lights
began to gleam in the dusk. A young man came out of the saloon and stood
eyeing her questioningly while he lit a cigarette. “Looking for a friend
to-night ?” he asked. Thea drew up the collar of her cape and walked on a
few paces. The young man shrugged his shoulders and drifted away.

Thea came back to the corner and stood there irresolutely. An old man
approached her. He, too, seemed to be waiting for a car. He wore an
overcoat with a black fur collar, his gray mustache was waxed into
little points, and his eyes were watery. He kept thrusting his face up
near hers. Her hat blew off and he ran after it--a stiff, pitiful skip
he had--and brought it back to her. Then, while she was pinning her hat
on, her cape blew up, and he held it down for her, looking at her
intently. His face worked as if he were going to cry or were frightened.
He leaned over and whispered something to her. It struck her as curious
that he was really quite timid, like an old beggar. “Oh, let me ALONE!”
 she cried miserably between her teeth. He vanished, disappeared like the
Devil in a play. But in the mean time something had got away from her;
she could not remember how the violins came in after the horns, just
there. When her cape blew up, perhaps--Why did these men torment her ? A
cloud of dust blew in her face and blinded her. There was some power
abroad in the world bent upon taking away from her that feeling with
which she had come out of the concert hall. Everything seemed to sweep
down on her to tear it out from under her cape. If one had that, the
world became one's enemy; people, buildings, wagons, cars, rushed at one
to crush it under, to make one let go of it. Thea glared round her at
the crowds, the ugly, sprawling streets, the long lines of lights, and
she was not crying now. Her eyes were brighter than even Harsanyi had
ever seen them. All these things and people were no longer remote and
negligible; they had to be met, they were lined up against her, they
were there to take something from her. Very well; they should never have
it. They might trample her to death, but they should never have it. As
long as she lived that ecstasy was going to be hers. She would live for
it, work for it, die for it; but she was going to have it, time after
time, height after height. She could hear the crash of the orchestra
again, and she rose on the brasses. She would have it, what the trumpets
were singing! She would have it, have it,--it! Under the old cape she
pressed her hands upon her heaving bosom, that was a little girl's no
longer.




VI

ONE afternoon in April, Theodore Thomas, the conductor of the Chicago
Symphony Orchestra, had turned out his desk light and was about to leave
his office in the Auditorium Building, when Harsanyi appeared in the
doorway. The conductor welcomed him with a hearty hand-grip and threw
off the overcoat he had just put on. He pushed Harsanyi into a chair and
sat down at his burdened desk, pointing to the piles of papers and
railway folders upon it.

“Another tour, clear to the coast. This traveling is the part of my work
that grinds me, Andor. You know what it means: bad food, dirt, noise,
exhaustion for the men and for me. I'm not so young as I once was. It's
time I quit the highway. This is the last tour, I swear!”

“Then I'm sorry for the 'highway.' I remember when I first heard you in
Pittsburg, long ago. It was a life-line you threw me. It's about one of
the people along your highway that I've come to see you. Whom do you
consider the best teacher for voice in Chicago ?”

Mr. Thomas frowned and pulled his heavy mustache. “Let me see; I suppose
on the whole Madison Bowers is the best. He's intelligent, and he had
good training. I don't like him.”

Harsanyi nodded. “I thought there was no one else. I don't like him,
either, so I hesitated. But I suppose he must do, for the present.”

“Have you found anything promising ? One of your own students ?”

“Yes, sir. A young Swedish girl from somewhere in Colorado. She is very
talented, and she seems to me to have a remarkable voice.”

“High voice ?”

“I think it will be; though her low voice has a beautiful quality, very
individual. She has had no instruction in voice at all, and I shrink
from handing her over to anybody; her own instinct about it has been so
good. It is one of those voices that manages itself easily, without
thinning as it goes up; good breathing and perfect relaxation. But she
must have a teacher, of course. There is a break in the middle voice, so
that the voice does not all work together; an unevenness.”

Thomas looked up. “So ? Curious; that cleft often happens with the
Swedes. Some of their best singers have had it. It always reminds me of
the space you so often see between their front teeth. Is she strong
physically ?”

Harsanyi's eye flashed. He lifted his hand before him and clenched it.
“Like a horse, like a tree! Every time I give her a lesson, I lose a
pound. She goes after what she wants.”

“Intelligent, you say ? Musically intelligent ?”

“Yes; but no cultivation whatever. She came to me like a fine young
savage, a book with nothing written in it. That is why I feel the
responsibility of directing her.” Harsanyi paused and crushed his soft
gray hat over his knee. “She would interest you, Mr. Thomas,” he added
slowly. “She has a quality--very individual.”

“Yes; the Scandinavians are apt to have that, too. She can't go to
Germany, I suppose ?”

“Not now, at any rate. She is poor.”

Thomas frowned again “I don't think Bowers a really first-rate man. He's
too petty to be really first-rate; in his nature, I mean. But I dare say
he's the best you can do, if you can't give her time enough yourself.”

Harsanyi waved his hand. “Oh, the time is nothing--she may have all she
wants. But I cannot teach her to sing.”

“Might not come amiss if you made a musician of her, however,” said Mr.
Thomas dryly.

“I have done my best. But I can only play with a voice, and this is not
a voice to be played with. I think she will be a musician, whatever
happens. She is not quick, but she is solid, real; not like these
others. My wife says that with that girl one swallow does not make a
summer.”

Mr. Thomas laughed. “Tell Mrs. Harsanyi that her remark conveys
something to me. Don't let yourself get too much interested. Voices are
so often disappointing; especially women's voices. So much chance about
it, so many factors.”

“Perhaps that is why they interest one. All the intelligence and talent
in the world can't make a singer. The voice is a wild thing. It can't be
bred in captivity. It is a sport, like the silver fox. It happens.”

Mr. Thomas smiled into Harsanyi's gleaming eye. “Why haven't you brought
her to sing for me ?”

“I've been tempted to, but I knew you were driven to death, with this
tour confronting you.”

“Oh, I can always find time to listen to a girl who has a voice, if she
means business. I'm sorry I'm leaving so soon. I could advise you better
if I had heard her. I can sometimes give a singer suggestions. I've
worked so much with them.”

“You're the only conductor I know who is not snobbish about singers.”
 Harsanyi spoke warmly.

“Dear me, why should I be ? They've learned from me, and I've learned
from them.” As they rose, Thomas took the younger man affectionately by
the arm. “Tell me about that wife of yours. Is she well, and as lovely
as ever ? And such fine children! Come to see me oftener, when I get
back. I miss it when you don't.”

The two men left the Auditorium Building together. Harsanyi walked home.
Even a short talk with Thomas always stimulated him. As he walked he was
recalling an evening they once spent together in Cincinnati.

Harsanyi was the soloist at one of Thomas's concerts there, and after
the performance the conductor had taken him off to a RATHSKELLER where
there was excellent German cooking, and where the proprietor saw to it
that Thomas had the best wines procurable. Thomas had been working with
the great chorus of the Festival Association and was speaking of it with
enthusiasm when Harsanyi asked him how it was that he was able to feel
such an interest in choral directing and in voices generally. Thomas
seldom spoke of his youth or his early struggles, but that night he
turned back the pages and told Harsanyi a long story.

He said he had spent the summer of his fifteenth year wandering about
alone in the South, giving violin concerts in little towns. He traveled
on horseback. When he came into a town, he went about all day tacking up
posters announcing his concert in the evening. Before the concert, he
stood at the door taking in the admission money until his audience had
arrived, and then he went on the platform and played. It was a lazy,
hand-to-mouth existence, and Thomas said he must have got to like that
easy way of living and the relaxing Southern atmosphere. At any rate,
when he got back to New York in the fall, he was rather torpid; perhaps
he had been growing too fast. From this adolescent drowsiness the lad
was awakened by two voices, by two women who sang in New York in
1851,--Jenny Lind and Henrietta Sontag. They were the first great
artists he had ever heard, and he never forgot his debt to them.

As he said, “It was not voice and execution alone. There was a greatness
about them. They were great women, great artists. They opened a new
world to me.” Night after night he went to hear them, striving to
reproduce the quality of their tone upon his violin. From that time his
idea about strings was completely changed, and on his violin he tried
always for the singing, vibrating tone, instead of the loud and somewhat
harsh tone then prevalent among even the best German violinists. In
later years he often advised violinists to study singing, and singers to
study violin. He told Harsanyi that he got his first conception of tone
quality from Jenny Lind.

“But, of course,” he added, “the great thing I got from Lind and Sontag
was the indefinite, not the definite, thing. For an impressionable boy,
their inspiration was incalculable. They gave me my first feeling for
the Italian style--but I could never say how much they gave me. At that
age, such influences are actually creative. I always think of my
artistic consciousness as beginning then.”

All his life Thomas did his best to repay what he felt he owed to the
singer's art. No man could get such singing from choruses, and no man
worked harder to raise the standard of singing in schools and churches
and choral societies.




VII

All through the lesson Thea had felt that Harsanyi was restless and
abstracted. Before the hour was over, he pushed back his chair and said
resolutely, “I am not in the mood, Miss Kronborg. I have something on my
mind, and I must talk to you. When do you intend to go home ?”

Thea turned to him in surprise. “The first of June, about. Mr. Larsen
will not need me after that, and I have not much money ahead. I shall
work hard this summer, though.”

“And to-day is the first of May; May-day.” Harsanyi leaned forward, his
elbows on his knees, his hands locked between them. “Yes, I must talk to
you about something. I have asked Madison Bowers to let me bring you to
him on Thursday, at your usual lesson-time. He is the best vocal teacher
in Chicago, and it is time you began to work seriously with your voice.”

Thea's brow wrinkled. “You mean take lessons of Bowers ?”

Harsanyi nodded, without lifting his head.

“But I can't, Mr. Harsanyi. I haven't got the time, and, besides--” she
blushed and drew her shoulders up stiffly--“besides, I can't afford to
pay two teachers.” Thea felt that she had blurted this out in the worst
possible way, and she turned back to the keyboard to hide her chagrin.

“I know that. I don't mean that you shall pay two teachers. After you go
to Bowers you will not need me. I need scarcely tell you that I shan't
be happy at losing you.”

Thea turned to him, hurt and angry. “But I don't want to go to Bowers. I
don't want to leave you. What's the matter ? Don't I work hard enough ?
I'm sure you teach people that don't try half as hard.”

Harsanyi rose to his feet. “Don't misunderstand me, Miss Kronborg. You
interest me more than any pupil I have. I have been thinking for months
about what you ought to do, since that night when you first sang for
me.” He walked over to the window, turned, and came toward her again. “I
believe that your voice is worth all that you can put into it. I have
not come to this decision rashly. I have studied you, and I have become
more and more convinced, against my own desires. I cannot make a singer
of you, so it was my business to find a man who could. I have even
consulted Theodore Thomas about it.”

“But suppose I don't want to be a singer ? I want to study with you.
What's the matter ? Do you really think I've no talent ? Can't I be a
pianist ?”

Harsanyi paced up and down the long rug in front of her. “My girl, you
are very talented. You could be a pianist, a good one. But the early
training of a pianist, such a pianist as you would want to be, must be
something tremendous. He must have had no other life than music. At your
age he must be the master of his instrument. Nothing can ever take the
place of that first training. You know very well that your technique is
good, but it is not remarkable. It will never overtake your
intelligence. You have a fine power of work, but you are not by nature a
student. You are not by nature, I think, a pianist. You would never find
yourself. In the effort to do so, I'm afraid your playing would become
warped, eccentric.” He threw back his head and looked at his pupil
intently with that one eye which sometimes seemed to see deeper than any
two eyes, as if its singleness gave it privileges. “Oh, I have watched
you very carefully, Miss Kronborg. Because you had had so little and had
yet done so much for yourself, I had a great wish to help you. I believe
that the strongest need of your nature is to find yourself, to emerge AS
yourself. Until I heard you sing I wondered how you were to do this, but
it has grown clearer to me every day.”

Thea looked away toward the window with hard, narrow eyes. “You mean I
can be a singer because I haven't brains enough to be a pianist.”

“You have brains enough and talent enough. But to do what you will want
to do, it takes more than these--it takes vocation. Now, I think you
have vocation, but for the voice, not for the piano. If you knew,”--he
stopped and sighed,--“if you knew how fortunate I sometimes think you.
With the voice the way is so much shorter, the rewards are more easily
won. In your voice I think Nature herself did for you what it would take
you many years to do at the piano. Perhaps you were not born in the
wrong place after all. Let us talk frankly now. We have never done so
before, and I have respected your reticence. What you want more than
anything else in the world is to be an artist; is that true ?”

She turned her face away from him and looked down at the keyboard. Her
answer came in a thickened voice. “Yes, I suppose so.”

“When did you first feel that you wanted to be an artist ?”

“I don't know. There was always--something.”

“Did you never think that you were going to sing ?”

“Yes.”

“How long ago was that ?”

“Always, until I came to you. It was you who made me want to play
piano.” Her voice trembled. “Before, I tried to think I did, but I was
pretending.”

Harsanyi reached out and caught the hand that was hanging at her side.
He pressed it as if to give her something. “Can't you see, my dear girl,
that was only because I happened to be the first artist you have ever
known ? If I had been a trombone player, it would have been the same; you
would have wanted to play trombone. But all the while you have been
working with such good-will, something has been struggling against me.
See, here we were, you and I and this instrument,”--he tapped the
piano,--“three good friends, working so hard. But all the while there
was something fighting us: your gift, and the woman you were meant to
be. When you find your way to that gift and to that woman, you will be
at peace. In the beginning it was an artist that you wanted to be; well,
you may be an artist, always.”

Thea drew a long breath. Her hands fell in her lap. “So I'm just where I
began. No teacher, nothing done. No money.”

Harsanyi turned away. “Feel no apprehension about the money, Miss
Kronborg. Come back in the fall and we shall manage that. I shall even
go to Mr. Thomas if necessary. This year will not be lost. If you but
knew what an advantage this winter's study, all your study of the piano,
will give you over most singers. Perhaps things have come out better for
you than if we had planned them knowingly.”

“You mean they have IF I can sing.”

Thea spoke with a heavy irony, so heavy, indeed, that it was coarse. It
grated upon Harsanyi because he felt that it was not sincere, an awkward
affectation.

He wheeled toward her. “Miss Kronborg, answer me this. YOU KNOW THAT YOU
CAN SING, do you not ? You have always known it. While we worked here
together you sometimes said to yourself, 'I have something you know
nothing about; I could surprise you.' Is that also true ?”

Thea nodded and hung her head.

“Why were you not frank with me ? Did I not deserve it ?”

She shuddered. Her bent shoulders trembled. “I don't know,” she
muttered. “I didn't mean to be like that. I couldn't. I can't. It's
different.”

“You mean it is very personal ?” he asked kindly.

She nodded. “Not at church or funerals, or with people like Mr. Larsen.
But with you it was--personal. I'm not like you and Mrs. Harsanyi. I
come of rough people. I'm rough. But I'm independent, too. It was--all I
had. There is no use my talking, Mr. Harsanyi. I can't tell you.”

“You needn't tell me. I know. Every artist knows.” Harsanyi stood
looking at his pupil's back, bent as if she were pushing something, at
her lowered head. “You can sing for those people because with them you
do not commit yourself. But the reality, one cannot uncover THAT until
one is sure. One can fail one's self, but one must not live to see that
fail; better never reveal it. Let me help you to make yourself sure of
it. That I can do better than Bowers.”

Thea lifted her face and threw out her hands.

Harsanyi shook his head and smiled. “Oh, promise nothing! You will have
much to do. There will not be voice only, but French, German, Italian.
You will have work enough. But sometimes you will need to be understood;
what you never show to any one will need companionship. And then you
must come to me.” He peered into her face with that searching, intimate
glance. “You know what I mean, the thing in you that has no business
with what is little, that will have to do only with beauty and power.”

Thea threw out her hands fiercely, as if to push him away. She made a
sound in her throat, but it was not articulate. Harsanyi took one of her
hands and kissed it lightly upon the back. His salute was one of
greeting, not of farewell, and it was for some one he had never seen.

When Mrs. Harsanyi came in at six o'clock, she found her husband sitting
listlessly by the window. “Tired ?” she asked.

“A little. I've just got through a difficulty. I've sent Miss Kronborg
away; turned her over to Bowers, for voice.”

“Sent Miss Kronborg away ? Andor, what is the matter with you ?”

“It's nothing rash. I've known for a long while I ought to do it. She is
made for a singer, not a pianist.”

Mrs. Harsanyi sat down on the piano chair. She spoke a little bitterly:
“How can you be sure of that ? She was, at least, the best you had. I
thought you meant to have her play at your students' recital next fall.
I am sure she would have made an impression. I could have dressed her so
that she would have been very striking. She had so much individuality.”

Harsanyi bent forward, looking at the floor. “Yes, I know. I shall miss
her, of course.”

Mrs. Harsanyi looked at her husband's fine head against the gray window.
She had never felt deeper tenderness for him than she did at that
moment. Her heart ached for him. “You will never get on, Andor,” she
said mournfully.

Harsanyi sat motionless. “No, I shall never get on,” he repeated
quietly. Suddenly he sprang up with that light movement she knew so
well, and stood in the window, with folded arms. “But some day I shall
be able to look her in the face and laugh because I did what I could for
her. I believe in her. She will do nothing common. She is uncommon, in a
common, common world. That is what I get out of it. It means more to me
than if she played at my concert and brought me a dozen pupils. All this
drudgery will kill me if once in a while I cannot hope something, for
somebody! If I cannot sometimes see a bird fly and wave my hand to it.”

His tone was angry and injured. Mrs. Harsanyi understood that this was
one of the times when his wife was a part of the drudgery, of the
“common, common world.”

He had let something he cared for go, and he felt bitterly about
whatever was left. The mood would pass, and he would be sorry. She knew
him. It wounded her, of course, but that hurt was not new. It was as old
as her love for him. She went out and left him alone.




VIII

ONE warm damp June night the Denver Express was speeding westward across
the earthy-smelling plains of Iowa. The lights in the day-coach were
turned low and the ventilators were open, admitting showers of soot and
dust upon the occupants of the narrow green plush chairs which were
tilted at various angles of discomfort. In each of these chairs some
uncomfortable human being lay drawn up, or stretched out, or writhing
from one position to another. There were tired men in rumpled shirts,
their necks bare and their suspenders down; old women with their heads
tied up in black handkerchiefs; bedraggled young women who went to sleep
while they were nursing their babies and forgot to button up their
dresses; dirty boys who added to the general discomfort by taking off
their boots. The brakeman, when he came through at midnight, sniffed the
heavy air disdainfully and looked up at the ventilators. As he glanced
down the double rows of contorted figures, he saw one pair of eyes that
were wide open and bright, a yellow head that was not overcome by the
stupefying heat and smell in the car. “There's a girl for you,” he
thought as he stopped by Thea's chair.

“Like to have the window up a little ?” he asked.

Thea smiled up at him, not misunderstanding his friendliness. “The girl
behind me is sick; she can't stand a draft. What time is it, please ?”

He took out his open-faced watch and held it before her eyes with a
knowing look. “In a hurry ?” he asked. “I'll leave the end door open and
air you out. Catch a wink; the time'll go faster.”

Thea nodded good-night to him and settled her head back on her pillow,
looking up at the oil lamps. She was going back to Moonstone for her
summer vacation, and she was sitting up all night in a day-coach because
that seemed such an easy way to save money. At her age discomfort was a
small matter, when one made five dollars a day by it. She had
confidently expected to sleep after the car got quiet, but in the two
chairs behind her were a sick girl and her mother, and the girl had been
coughing steadily since ten o'clock. They had come from somewhere in
Pennsylvania, and this was their second night on the road. The mother
said they were going to Colorado “for her daughter's lungs.” The
daughter was a little older than Thea, perhaps nineteen, with patient
dark eyes and curly brown hair. She was pretty in spite of being so
sooty and travel-stained. She had put on an ugly figured satine kimono
over her loosened clothes. Thea, when she boarded the train in Chicago,
happened to stop and plant her heavy telescope on this seat. She had not
intended to remain there, but the sick girl had looked up at her with an
eager smile and said, “Do sit there, miss. I'd so much rather not have a
gentleman in front of me.”

After the girl began to cough there were no empty seats left, and if
there had been Thea could scarcely have changed without hurting her
feelings. The mother turned on her side and went to sleep; she was used
to the cough. But the girl lay wide awake, her eyes fixed on the roof of
the car, as Thea's were. The two girls must have seen very different
things there.

Thea fell to going over her winter in Chicago. It was only under unusual
or uncomfortable conditions like these that she could keep her mind
fixed upon herself or her own affairs for any length of time. The rapid
motion and the vibration of the wheels under her seemed to give her
thoughts rapidity and clearness. She had taken twenty very expensive
lessons from Madison Bowers, but she did not yet know what he thought of
her or of her ability. He was different from any man with whom she had
ever had to do. With her other teachers she had felt a personal
relation; but with him she did not. Bowers was a cold, bitter,
avaricious man, but he knew a great deal about voices. He worked with a
voice as if he were in a laboratory, conducting a series of experiments.
He was conscientious and industrious, even capable of a certain cold
fury when he was working with an interesting voice, but Harsanyi
declared that he had the soul of a shrimp, and could no more make an
artist than a throat specialist could. Thea realized that he had taught
her a great deal in twenty lessons.

Although she cared so much less for Bowers than for Harsanyi, Thea was,
on the whole, happier since she had been studying with him than she had
been before. She had always told herself that she studied piano to fit
herself to be a music teacher. But she never asked herself why she was
studying voice. Her voice, more than any other part of her, had to do
with that confidence, that sense of wholeness and inner well-being that
she had felt at moments ever since she could remember.

Of this feeling Thea had never spoken to any human being until that day
when she told Harsanyi that “there had always been--something.” Hitherto
she had felt but one obligation toward it--secrecy; to protect it even
from herself. She had always believed that by doing all that was
required of her by her family, her teachers, her pupils, she kept that
part of herself from being caught up in the meshes of common things. She
took it for granted that some day, when she was older, she would know a
great deal more about it. It was as if she had an appointment to meet
the rest of herself sometime, somewhere. It was moving to meet her and
she was moving to meet it. That meeting awaited her, just as surely as,
for the poor girl in the seat behind her, there awaited a hole in the
earth, already dug.

For Thea, so much had begun with a hole in the earth. Yes, she
reflected, this new part of her life had all begun that morning when she
sat on the clay bank beside Ray Kennedy, under the flickering shade of
the cottonwood tree. She remembered the way Ray had looked at her that
morning. Why had he cared so much ? And Wunsch, and Dr. Archie, and
Spanish Johnny, why had they ? It was something that had to do with her
that made them care, but it was not she. It was something they believed
in, but it was not she. Perhaps each of them concealed another person in
himself, just as she did. Why was it that they seemed to feel and to
hunt for a second person in her and not in each other ? Thea frowned up
at the dull lamp in the roof of the car. What if one's second self could
somehow speak to all these second selves ? What if one could bring them
out, as whiskey did Spanish Johnny's ? How deep they lay, these second
persons, and how little one knew about them, except to guard them
fiercely. It was to music, more than to anything else, that these hidden
things in people responded. Her mother--even her mother had something of
that sort which replied to music.

Thea found herself listening for the coughing behind her and not hearing
it. She turned cautiously and looked back over the head-rest of her
chair. The poor girl had fallen asleep. Thea looked at her intently. Why
was she so afraid of men ? Why did she shrink into herself and avert her
face whenever a man passed her chair ? Thea thought she knew; of course,
she knew. How horrible to waste away like that, in the time when one
ought to be growing fuller and stronger and rounder every day. Suppose
there were such a dark hole open for her, between to-night and that
place where she was to meet herself ? Her eyes narrowed. She put her hand
on her breast and felt how warm it was; and within it there was a full,
powerful pulsation. She smiled--though she was ashamed of it--with the
natural contempt of strength for weakness, with the sense of physical
security which makes the savage merciless. Nobody could die while they
felt like that inside. The springs there were wound so tight that it
would be a long while before there was any slack in them. The life in
there was rooted deep. She was going to have a few things before she
died. She realized that there were a great many trains dashing east and
west on the face of the continent that night, and that they all carried
young people who meant to have things. But the difference was that SHE
WAS GOING TO GET THEM! That was all. Let people try to stop her! She
glowered at the rows of feckless bodies that lay sprawled in the chairs.
Let them try it once! Along with the yearning that came from some deep
part of her, that was selfless and exalted, Thea had a hard kind of
cockiness, a determination to get ahead. Well, there are passages in
life when that fierce, stubborn self-assertion will stand its ground
after the nobler feeling is overwhelmed and beaten under.

Having told herself once more that she meant to grab a few things, Thea
went to sleep.

She was wakened in the morning by the sunlight, which beat fiercely
through the glass of the car window upon her face. She made herself as
clean as she could, and while the people all about her were getting cold
food out of their lunch-baskets she escaped into the dining-car. Her
thrift did not go to the point of enabling her to carry a lunchbasket.
At that early hour there were few people in the dining-car. The linen
was white and fresh, the darkies were trim and smiling, and the sunlight
gleamed pleasantly upon the silver and the glass water-bottles. On each
table there was a slender vase with a single pink rose in it. When Thea
sat down she looked into her rose and thought it the most beautiful
thing in the world; it was wide open, recklessly offering its yellow
heart, and there were drops of water on the petals. All the future was
in that rose, all that one would like to be. The flower put her in an
absolutely regal mood. She had a whole pot of coffee, and scrambled eggs
with chopped ham, utterly disregarding the astonishing price they cost.
She had faith enough in what she could do, she told herself, to have
eggs if she wanted them. At the table opposite her sat a man and his
wife and little boy--Thea classified them as being “from the East.”
 They spoke in that quick, sure staccato, which Thea, like Ray Kennedy,
pretended to scorn and secretly admired. People who could use words in
that confident way, and who spoke them elegantly, had a great advantage
in life, she reflected. There were so many words which she could not
pronounce in speech as she had to do in singing. Language was like
clothes; it could be a help to one, or it could give one away. But the
most important thing was that one should not pretend to be what one was
not.

When she paid her check she consulted the waiter. “Waiter, do you
suppose I could buy one of those roses ? I'm out of the day-coach, and
there is a sick girl in there. I'd like to take her a cup of coffee and
one of those flowers.”

The waiter liked nothing better than advising travelers less
sophisticated than himself. He told Thea there were a few roses left in
the icebox and he would get one. He took the flower and the coffee into
the day-coach. Thea pointed out the girl, but she did not accompany him.
She hated thanks and never received them gracefully. She stood outside
on the platform to get some fresh air into her lungs. The train was
crossing the Platte River now, and the sunlight was so intense that it
seemed to quiver in little flames on the glittering sandbars, the scrub
willows, and the curling, fretted shallows.

Thea felt that she was coming back to her own land. She had often heard
Mrs. Kronborg say that she “believed in immigration,” and so did Thea
believe in it. This earth seemed to her young and fresh and kindly, a
place where refugees from old, sad countries were given another chance.
The mere absence of rocks gave the soil a kind of amiability and
generosity, and the absence of natural boundaries gave the spirit a
wider range. Wire fences might mark the end of a man's pasture, but they
could not shut in his thoughts as mountains and forests can. It was over
flat lands like this, stretching out to drink the sun, that the larks
sang--and one's heart sang there, too. Thea was glad that this was her
country, even if one did not learn to speak elegantly there. It was,
somehow, an honest country, and there was a new song in that blue air
which had never been sung in the world before. It was hard to tell about
it, for it had nothing to do with words; it was like the light of the
desert at noon, or the smell of the sagebrush after rain; intangible but
powerful. She had the sense of going back to a friendly soil, whose
friendship was somehow going to strengthen her; a naive, generous
country that gave one its joyous force, its large-hearted, childlike
power to love, just as it gave one its coarse, brilliant flowers.

As she drew in that glorious air Thea's mind went back to Ray Kennedy.
He, too, had that feeling of empire; as if all the Southwest really
belonged to him because he had knocked about over it so much, and knew
it, as he said, “like the blisters on his own hands.” That feeling, she
reflected, was the real element of companionship between her and Ray.
Now that she was going back to Colorado, she realized this as she had
not done before.




IX

THEA reached Moonstone in the late afternoon, and all the Kronborgs were
there to meet her except her two older brothers. Gus and Charley were
young men now, and they had declared at noon that it would “look silly
if the whole bunch went down to the train.” “There's no use making a
fuss over Thea just because she's been to Chicago,” Charley warned his
mother. “She's inclined to think pretty well of herself, anyhow, and if
you go treating her like company, there'll be no living in the house
with her.” Mrs. Kronborg simply leveled her eyes at Charley, and he
faded away, muttering. She had, as Mr. Kronborg always said with an
inclination of his head, good control over her children. Anna, too,
wished to absent herself from the party, but in the end her curiosity
got the better of her. So when Thea stepped down from the porter's
stool, a very creditable Kronborg representation was grouped on the
platform to greet her. After they had all kissed her (Gunner and Axel
shyly), Mr. Kronborg hurried his flock into the hotel omnibus, in which
they were to be driven ceremoniously home, with the neighbors looking
out of their windows to see them go by.

All the family talked to her at once, except Thor,--impressive in new
trousers,--who was gravely silent and who refused to sit on Thea's lap.
One of the first things Anna told her was that Maggie Evans, the girl
who used to cough in prayer meeting, died yesterday, and had made a
request that Thea sing at her funeral.

Thea's smile froze. “I'm not going to sing at all this summer, except my
exercises. Bowers says I taxed my voice last winter, singing at funerals
so much. If I begin the first day after I get home, there'll be no end
to it. You can tell them I caught cold on the train, or something.”

Thea saw Anna glance at their mother. Thea remembered having seen that
look on Anna's face often before, but she had never thought anything
about it because she was used to it. Now she realized that the look was
distinctly spiteful, even vindictive. She suddenly realized that Anna
had always disliked her.

Mrs. Kronborg seemed to notice nothing, and changed the trend of the
conversation, telling Thea that Dr. Archie and Mr. Upping, the jeweler,
were both coming in to see her that evening, and that she had asked
Spanish Johnny to come, because he had behaved well all winter and ought
to be encouraged.

The next morning Thea wakened early in her own room up under the eaves
and lay watching the sunlight shine on the roses of her wall-paper. She
wondered whether she would ever like a plastered room as well as this
one lined with scantlings. It was snug and tight, like the cabin of a
little boat. Her bed faced the window and stood against the wall, under
the slant of the ceiling. When she went away she could just touch the
ceiling with the tips of her fingers; now she could touch it with the
palm of her hand. It was so little that it was like a sunny cave, with
roses running all over the roof. Through the low window, as she lay
there, she could watch people going by on the farther side of the
street; men, going downtown to open their stores. Thor was over there,
rattling his express wagon along the sidewalk. Tillie had put a bunch of
French pinks in a tumbler of water on her dresser, and they gave out a
pleasant perfume. The blue jays were fighting and screeching in the
cottonwood tree outside her window, as they always did, and she could
hear the old Baptist deacon across the street calling his chickens, as
she had heard him do every summer morning since she could remember. It
was pleasant to waken up in that bed, in that room, and to feel the
brightness of the morning, while light quivered about the low, papered
ceiling in golden spots, refracted by the broken mirror and the glass of
water that held the pinks. “IM LEUCHTENDEN SOMMERMORGEN”; those lines,
and the face of her old teacher, came back to Thea, floated to her out
of sleep, perhaps. She had been dreaming something pleasant, but she
could not remember what. She would go to call upon Mrs. Kohler to-day,
and see the pigeons washing their pink feet in the drip under the water
tank, and flying about their house that was sure to have a fresh coat of
white paint on it for summer. On the way home she would stop to see Mrs.
Tellamantez. On Sunday she would coax Gunner to take her out to the sand
hills. She had missed them in Chicago; had been homesick for their
brilliant morning gold and for their soft colors at evening. The Lake,
somehow, had never taken their place.

While she lay planning, relaxed in warm drowsiness, she heard a knock at
her door. She supposed it was Tillie, who sometimes fluttered in on her
before she was out of bed to offer some service which the family would
have ridiculed. But instead, Mrs. Kronborg herself came in, carrying a
tray with Thea's breakfast set out on one of the best white napkins.
Thea sat up with some embarrassment and pulled her nightgown together
across her chest. Mrs. Kronborg was always busy downstairs in the
morning, and Thea could not remember when her mother had come to her
room before.

“I thought you'd be tired, after traveling, and might like to take it
easy for once.” Mrs. Kronborg put the tray on the edge of the bed. “I
took some thick cream for you before the boys got at it. They raised a
howl.” She chuckled and sat down in the big wooden rocking chair. Her
visit made Thea feel grown-up, and, somehow, important.

Mrs. Kronborg asked her about Bowers and the Harsanyis. She felt a great
change in Thea, in her face and in her manner. Mr. Kronborg had noticed
it, too, and had spoken of it to his wife with great satisfaction while
they were undressing last night. Mrs. Kronborg sat looking at her
daughter, who lay on her side, supporting herself on her elbow and
lazily drinking her coffee from the tray before her. Her short-sleeved
nightgown had come open at the throat again, and Mrs. Kronborg noticed
how white her arms and shoulders were, as if they had been dipped in new
milk. Her chest was fuller than when she went away, her breasts rounder
and firmer, and though she was so white where she was uncovered, they
looked rosy through the thin muslin. Her body had the elasticity that
comes of being highly charged with the desire to live. Her hair, hanging
in two loose braids, one by either cheek, was just enough disordered to
catch the light in all its curly ends.

Thea always woke with a pink flush on her cheeks, and this morning her
mother thought she had never seen her eyes so wide-open and bright; like
clear green springs in the wood, when the early sunlight sparkles in
them. She would make a very handsome woman, Mrs. Kronborg said to
herself, if she would only get rid of that fierce look she had
sometimes. Mrs. Kronborg took great pleasure in good looks, wherever she
found them. She still remembered that, as a baby, Thea had been the
“best-formed” of any of her children.

“I'll have to get you a longer bed,” she remarked, as she put the tray
on the table. “You're getting too long for that one.”

Thea looked up at her mother and laughed, dropping back on her pillow
with a magnificent stretch of her whole body. Mrs. Kronborg sat down
again.

“I don't like to press you, Thea, but I think you'd better sing at that
funeral to-morrow. I'm afraid you'll always be sorry if you don't.
Sometimes a little thing like that, that seems nothing at the time,
comes back on one afterward and troubles one a good deal. I don't mean
the church shall run you to death this summer, like they used to. I've
spoken my mind to your father about that, and he's very reasonable. But
Maggie talked a good deal about you to people this winter; always asked
what word we'd had, and said how she missed your singing and all. I
guess you ought to do that much for her.”

“All right, mother, if you think so.” Thea lay looking at her mother
with intensely bright eyes.

“That's right, daughter.” Mrs. Kronborg rose and went over to get the
tray, stopping to put her hand on Thea's chest. “You're filling out
nice,” she said, feeling about. “No, I wouldn't bother about the
buttons. Leave 'em stay off. This is a good time to harden your chest.”

Thea lay still and heard her mother's firm step receding along the bare
floor of the trunk loft. There was no sham about her mother, she
reflected. Her mother knew a great many things of which she never
talked, and all the church people were forever chattering about things
of which they knew nothing. She liked her mother.

Now for Mexican Town and the Kohlers! She meant to run in on the old
woman without warning, and hug her.




X

SPANISH JOHNNY had no shop of his own, but he kept a table and an
order-book in one corner of the drug store where paints and wall-paper
were sold, and he was sometimes to be found there for an hour or so
about noon. Thea had gone into the drug store to have a friendly chat
with the proprietor, who used to lend her books from his shelves. She
found Johnny there, trimming rolls of wall-paper for the parlor of
Banker Smith's new house. She sat down on the top of his table and
watched him.

“Johnny,” she said suddenly, “I want you to write down the words of that
Mexican serenade you used to sing; you know, 'ROSA DE NOCHE.' It's an
unusual song. I'm going to study it. I know enough Spanish for that.”

Johnny looked up from his roller with his bright, affable smile. “SI,
but it is low for you, I think; VOZ CONTRALTO. It is low for me.”

“Nonsense. I can do more with my low voice than I used to. I'll show
you. Sit down and write it out for me, please.” Thea beckoned him with
the short yellow pencil tied to his order-book.

Johnny ran his fingers through his curly black hair. “If you wish. I do
not know if that SERENATA all right for young ladies. Down there it is
more for married ladies. They sing it for husbands--or somebody else,
may-bee.” Johnny's eyes twinkled and he apologized gracefully with his
shoulders. He sat down at the table, and while Thea looked over his arm,
began to write the song down in a long, slanting script, with highly
ornamental capitals. Presently he looked up. “This-a song not exactly
Mexican,” he said thoughtfully. “It come from farther down; Brazil,
Venezuela, may-bee. I learn it from some fellow down there, and he learn
it from another fellow. It is-a most like Mexican, but not quite.” Thea
did not release him, but pointed to the paper. There were three verses
of the song in all, and when Johnny had written them down, he sat
looking at them meditatively, his head on one side. “I don' think for a
high voice, SENORITA,” he objected with polite persistence. “How you
accompany with piano ?”

“Oh, that will be easy enough.”

“For you, may-bee!” Johnny smiled and drummed on the table with the tips
of his agile brown fingers. “You know something ? Listen, I tell you.” He
rose and sat down on the table beside her, putting his foot on the
chair. He loved to talk at the hour of noon. “When you was a little
girl, no bigger than that, you come to my house one day 'bout noon, like
this, and I was in the door, playing guitar. You was barehead, barefoot;
you run away from home. You stand there and make a frown at me an'
listen. By 'n by you say for me to sing. I sing some lil' ting, and then
I say for you to sing with me. You don' know no words, of course, but
you take the air and you sing it justa beauti-ful! I never see a child
do that, outside Mexico. You was, oh, I do' know--seven year, may-bee.
By 'n by the preacher come look for you and begin for scold. I say,
'Don' scold, Meester Kronborg. She come for hear guitar. She gotta some
music in her, that child. Where she get ?' Then he tell me 'bout your
gran'papa play oboe in the old country. I never forgetta that time.”
 Johnny chuckled softly.

Thea nodded. “I remember that day, too. I liked your music better than
the church music. When are you going to have a dance over there,
Johnny ?”

Johnny tilted his head. “Well, Saturday night the Spanish boys have a
lil' party, some DANZA. You know Miguel Ramas ? He have some young
cousins, two boys, very nice-a, come from Torreon. They going to Salt
Lake for some job-a, and stay off with him two-three days, and he mus'
have a party. You like to come ?”

That was how Thea came to go to the Mexican ball. Mexican Town had been
increased by half a dozen new families during the last few years, and
the Mexicans had put up an adobe dance-hall, that looked exactly like
one of their own dwellings, except that it was a little longer, and was
so unpretentious that nobody in Moonstone knew of its existence. The
“Spanish boys” are reticent about their own affairs. Ray Kennedy used to
know about all their little doings, but since his death there was no one
whom the Mexicans considered SIMPATICO.

On Saturday evening after supper Thea told her mother that she was going
over to Mrs. Tellamantez's to watch the Mexicans dance for a while, and
that Johnny would bring her home.

Mrs. Kronborg smiled. She noticed that Thea had put on a white dress and
had done her hair up with unusual care, and that she carried her best
blue scarf. “Maybe you'll take a turn yourself, eh ? I wouldn't mind
watching them Mexicans. They're lovely dancers.”

Thea made a feeble suggestion that her mother might go with her, but
Mrs. Kronborg was too wise for that. She knew that Thea would have a
better time if she went alone, and she watched her daughter go out of
the gate and down the sidewalk that led to the depot.

Thea walked slowly. It was a soft, rosy evening. The sand hills were
lavender. The sun had gone down a glowing copper disk, and the fleecy
clouds in the east were a burning rose-color, flecked with gold. Thea
passed the cottonwood grove and then the depot, where she left the
sidewalk and took the sandy path toward Mexican Town. She could hear the
scraping of violins being tuned, the tinkle of mandolins, and the growl
of a double bass. Where had they got a double bass ? She did not know
there was one in Moonstone. She found later that it was the property
of one of Ramas's young cousins, who was taking it to Utah with him
to cheer him at his “job-a.”

The Mexicans never wait until it is dark to begin to dance, and Thea had
no difficulty in finding the new hall, because every other house in the
town was deserted. Even the babies had gone to the ball; a neighbor was
always willing to hold the baby while the mother danced. Mrs.
Tellamantez came out to meet Thea and led her in. Johnny bowed to her
from the platform at the end of the room, where he was playing the
mandolin along with two fiddles and the bass. The hall was a long low
room, with whitewashed walls, a fairly tight plank floor, wooden benches
along the sides, and a few bracket lamps screwed to the frame timbers.
There must have been fifty people there, counting the children. The
Mexican dances were very much family affairs. The fathers always danced
again and again with their little daughters, as well as with their
wives. One of the girls came up to greet Thea, her dark cheeks glowing
with pleasure and cordiality, and introduced her brother, with whom she
had just been dancing. “You better take him every time he asks you,” she
whispered. “He's the best dancer here, except Johnny.”

Thea soon decided that the poorest dancer was herself. Even Mrs.
Tellamantez, who always held her shoulders so stiffly, danced better
than she did. The musicians did not remain long at their post. When one
of them felt like dancing, he called some other boy to take his
instrument, put on his coat, and went down on the floor. Johnny, who
wore a blousy white silk shirt, did not even put on his coat.

The dances the railroad men gave in Firemen's Hall were the only dances
Thea had ever been allowed to go to, and they were very different from
this. The boys played rough jokes and thought it smart to be clumsy and
to run into each other on the floor. For the square dances there was
always the bawling voice of the caller, who was also the county
auctioneer.

This Mexican dance was soft and quiet. There was no calling, the
conversation was very low, the rhythm of the music was smooth and
engaging, the men were graceful and courteous. Some of them Thea had
never before seen out of their working clothes, smeared with grease from
the round-house or clay from the brickyard. Sometimes, when the music
happened to be a popular Mexican waltz song, the dancers sang it softly
as they moved. There were three little girls under twelve, in their
first communion dresses, and one of them had an orange marigold in her
black hair, just over her ear. They danced with the men and with each
other. There was an atmosphere of ease and friendly pleasure in the low,
dimly lit room, and Thea could not help wondering whether the Mexicans
had no jealousies or neighborly grudges as the people in Moonstone had.
There was no constraint of any kind there to-night, but a kind of
natural harmony about their movements, their greetings, their low
conversation, their smiles.

Ramas brought up his two young cousins, Silvo and Felipe, and presented
them. They were handsome, smiling youths, of eighteen and twenty, with
pale-gold skins, smooth cheeks, aquiline features, and wavy black hair,
like Johnny's. They were dressed alike, in black velvet jackets and soft
silk shirts, with opal shirt-buttons and flowing black ties looped
through gold rings. They had charming manners, and low, guitar-like
voices. They knew almost no English, but a Mexican boy can pay a great
many compliments with a very limited vocabulary. The Ramas boys thought
Thea dazzlingly beautiful. They had never seen a Scandinavian girl
before, and her hair and fair skin bewitched them. “BLANCO Y ORO,
SEMEJANTE LA PASCUA!” (White and gold, like Easter!) they exclaimed to
each other. Silvo, the younger, declared that he could never go on to
Utah; that he and his double bass had reached their ultimate
destination. The elder was more crafty; he asked Miguel Ramas whether
there would be “plenty more girls like that _A_ Salt Lake, maybee ?”

Silvo, overhearing, gave his brother a contemptuous glance. “Plenty more
A PARAISO may-bee!” he retorted. When they were not dancing with her,
their eyes followed her, over the coiffures of their other partners.
That was not difficult; one blonde head moving among so many dark ones.

Thea had not meant to dance much, but the Ramas boys danced so well and
were so handsome and adoring that she yielded to their entreaties. When
she sat out a dance with them, they talked to her about their family at
home, and told her how their mother had once punned upon their name.
RAMA, in Spanish, meant a branch, they explained. Once when they were
little lads their mother took them along when she went to help the women
decorate the church for Easter. Some one asked her whether she had
brought any flowers, and she replied that she had brought her “ramas.”
 This was evidently a cherished family story.

When it was nearly midnight, Johnny announced that every one was going
to his house to have “some lil' icecream and some lil' MUSICA.” He began
to put out the lights and Mrs. Tellamantez led the way across the square
to her CASA. The Ramas brothers escorted Thea, and as they stepped out
of the door, Silvo exclaimed, “HACE FRIO!” and threw his velvet coat
about her shoulders.

Most of the company followed Mrs. Tellamantez, and they sat about on the
gravel in her little yard while she and Johnny and Mrs. Miguel Ramas
served the ice-cream. Thea sat on Felipe's coat, since Silvo's was
already about her shoulders. The youths lay down on the shining gravel
beside her, one on her right and one on her left. Johnny already called
them “LOS ACOLITOS,” the altar-boys. The talk all about them was low,
and indolent. One of the girls was playing on Johnny's guitar, another
was picking lightly at a mandolin. The moonlight was so bright that one
could see every glance and smile, and the flash of their teeth. The
moonflowers over Mrs. Tellamantez's door were wide open and of an
unearthly white. The moon itself looked like a great pale flower in the
sky.

After all the ice-cream was gone, Johnny approached Thea, his guitar
under his arm, and the elder Ramas boy politely gave up his place.
Johnny sat down, took a long breath, struck a fierce chord, and then
hushed it with his other hand. “Now we have some lil' SERENATA, eh ? You
wan' a try ?”

When Thea began to sing, instant silence fell upon the company. She felt
all those dark eyes fix themselves upon her intently. She could see them
shine. The faces came out of the shadow like the white flowers over the
door. Felipe leaned his head upon his hand. Silvo dropped on his back
and lay looking at the moon, under the impression that he was still
looking at Thea. When she finished the first verse, Thea whispered to
Johnny, “Again, I can do it better than that.”

She had sung for churches and funerals and teachers, but she had never
before sung for a really musical people, and this was the first time she
had ever felt the response that such a people can give. They turned
themselves and all they had over to her. For the moment they cared about
nothing in the world but what she was doing. Their faces confronted her,
open, eager, unprotected. She felt as if all these warm-blooded people
debouched into her. Mrs. Tellamantez's fateful resignation, Johnny's
madness, the adoration of the boy who lay still in the sand; in an
instant these things seemed to be within her instead of without, as if
they had come from her in the first place.

When she finished, her listeners broke into excited murmur. The men
began hunting feverishly for cigarettes. Famos Serranos the barytone
bricklayer, touched Johnny's arm, gave him a questioning look, then
heaved a deep sigh. Johnny dropped on his elbow, wiping his face and
neck and hands with his handkerchief. “SENORITA,” he panted, “if you
sing like that once in the City of Mexico, they just-a go crazy. In the
City of Mexico they ain't-a sit like stumps when they hear that, not-a
much! When they like, they just-a give you the town.”

Thea laughed. She, too, was excited. “Think so, Johnny ? Come, sing
something with me. EL PARRENO; I haven't sung that for a long time.”

Johnny laughed and hugged his guitar. “You not-a forget him ?” He began
teasing his strings. “Come!” He threw back his head, “ANOCHE-E-E--”


“ANOCHE ME CONFESSE CON UN PADRE CARMELITE, Y ME DIO PENITENCIA QUE
BESARAS TU BOQUITA.”

(Last night I made confession With a Carmelite father, And he gave me
absolution For the kisses you imprinted.)


Johnny had almost every fault that a tenor can have. His voice was thin,
unsteady, husky in the middle tones. But it was distinctly a voice, and
sometimes he managed to get something very sweet out of it. Certainly it
made him happy to sing. Thea kept glancing down at him as he lay there
on his elbow. His eyes seemed twice as large as usual and had lights in
them like those the moonlight makes on black, running water. Thea
remembered the old stories about his “spells.” She had never seen him
when his madness was on him, but she felt something tonight at her elbow
that gave her an idea of what it might be like. For the first time she
fully understood the cryptic explanation that Mrs. Tellamantez had made
to Dr. Archie, long ago. There were the same shells along the walk; she
believed she could pick out the very one. There was the same moon up
yonder, and panting at her elbow was the same Johnny--fooled by the same
old things!

When they had finished, Famos, the barytone, murmured something to
Johnny; who replied, “Sure we can sing 'Trovatore.' We have no alto, but
all the girls can sing alto and make some noise.”

The women laughed. Mexican women of the poorer class do not sing like
the men. Perhaps they are too indolent. In the evening, when the men are
singing their throats dry on the doorstep, or around the camp-fire
beside the work-train, the women usually sit and comb their hair.

While Johnny was gesticulating and telling everybody what to sing and
how to sing it, Thea put out her foot and touched the corpse of Silvo
with the toe of her slipper. “Aren't you going to sing, Silvo ?” she
asked teasingly.

The boy turned on his side and raised himself on his elbow for a moment.
“Not this night, SENORITA,” he pleaded softly, “not this night!” He
dropped back again, and lay with his cheek on his right arm, the hand
lying passive on the sand above his head.

“How does he flatten himself into the ground like that ?” Thea asked
herself. “I wish I knew. It's very effective, somehow.”

Across the gulch the Kohlers' little house slept among its trees, a dark
spot on the white face of the desert. The windows of their upstairs
bedroom were open, and Paulina had listened to the dance music for a
long while before she drowsed off. She was a light sleeper, and when she
woke again, after midnight, Johnny's concert was at its height. She lay
still until she could bear it no longer. Then she wakened Fritz and they
went over to the window and leaned out. They could hear clearly there.

“DIE THEA,” whispered Mrs. Kohler; “it must be. ACH, WUNDERSCHON!”

Fritz was not so wide awake as his wife. He grunted and scratched on the
floor with his bare foot. They were listening to a Mexican part-song;
the tenor, then the soprano, then both together; the barytone joins
them, rages, is extinguished; the tenor expires in sobs, and the soprano
finishes alone. When the soprano's last note died away, Fritz nodded to
his wife. “JA,” he said; “SCHON.”

There was silence for a few moments. Then the guitar sounded fiercely,
and several male voices began the sextette from “Lucia.” Johnny's reedy
tenor they knew well, and the bricklayer's big, opaque barytone; the
others might be anybody over there--just Mexican voices. Then at the
appointed, at the acute, moment, the soprano voice, like a fountain jet,
shot up into the light. “HORCH! HORCH!” the old people whispered, both
at once. How it leaped from among those dusky male voices! How it played
in and about and around and over them, like a goldfish darting among
creek minnows, like a yellow butterfly soaring above a swarm of dark
ones. “Ah,” said Mrs. Kohler softly, “the dear man; if he could hear her
now!”




XI

MRS. KRONBORG had said that Thea was not to be disturbed on Sunday
morning, and she slept until noon. When she came downstairs the family
were just sitting down to dinner, Mr. Kronborg at one end of the long
table, Mrs. Kronborg at the other. Anna, stiff and ceremonious, in her
summer silk, sat at her father's right, and the boys were strung along
on either side of the table. There was a place left for Thea between her
mother and Thor. During the silence which preceded the blessing, Thea
felt something uncomfortable in the air. Anna and her older brothers had
lowered their eyes when she came in. Mrs. Kronborg nodded cheerfully,
and after the blessing, as she began to pour the coffee, turned to her.

“I expect you had a good time at that dance, Thea. I hope you got your
sleep out.”

“High society, that,” remarked Charley, giving the mashed potatoes a
vicious swat. Anna's mouth and eyebrows became half-moons.

Thea looked across the table at the uncompromising countenances of her
older brothers. “Why, what's the matter with the Mexicans ?” she asked,
flushing. “They don't trouble anybody, and they are kind to their
families and have good manners.”

“Nice clean people; got some style about them. Do you really like that
kind, Thea, or do you just pretend to ? That's what I'd like to know.”
 Gus looked at her with pained inquiry. But he at least looked at her.

“They're just as clean as white people, and they have a perfect right to
their own ways. Of course I like 'em. I don't pretend things.”

“Everybody according to their own taste,” remarked Charley bitterly.
“Quit crumbing your bread up, Thor. Ain't you learned how to eat yet ?”

“Children, children!” said Mr. Kronborg nervously, looking up from the
chicken he was dismembering. He glanced at his wife, whom he expected to
maintain harmony in the family.

“That's all right, Charley. Drop it there,” said Mrs. Kronborg. “No use
spoiling your Sunday dinner with race prejudices. The Mexicans suit me
and Thea very well. They are a useful people. Now you can just talk
about something else.”

Conversation, however, did not flourish at that dinner. Everybody ate as
fast as possible. Charley and Gus said they had engagements and left the
table as soon as they finished their apple pie. Anna sat primly and ate
with great elegance. When she spoke at all she spoke to her father,
about church matters, and always in a commiserating tone, as if he had
met with some misfortune. Mr. Kronborg, quite innocent of her
intentions, replied kindly and absent-mindedly. After the dessert he
went to take his usual Sunday afternoon nap, and Mrs. Kronborg carried
some dinner to a sick neighbor. Thea and Anna began to clear the table.

“I should think you would show more consideration for father's position,
Thea,” Anna began as soon as she and her sister were alone.

Thea gave her a sidelong glance. “Why, what have I done to father ?”

“Everybody at Sunday-School was talking about you going over there and
singing with the Mexicans all night, when you won't sing for the church.
Somebody heard you, and told it all over town. Of course, we all get the
blame for it.”

“Anything disgraceful about singing ?” Thea asked with a provoking yawn.

“I must say you choose your company! You always had that streak in you,
Thea. We all hoped that going away would improve you. Of course, it
reflects on father when you are scarcely polite to the nice people here
and make up to the rowdies.”

“Oh, it's my singing with the Mexicans you object to ?” Thea put down a
tray full of dishes. “Well, I like to sing over there, and I don't like
to over here. I'll sing for them any time they ask me to. They know
something about what I'm doing. They're a talented people.”

“Talented!” Anna made the word sound like escaping steam. “I suppose you
think it's smart to come home and throw that at your family!”

Thea picked up the tray. By this time she was as white as the Sunday
tablecloth. “Well,” she replied in a cold, even tone, “I'll have to
throw it at them sooner or later. It's just a question of when, and it
might as well be now as any time.” She carried the tray blindly into the
kitchen.

Tillie, who was always listening and looking out for her, took the
dishes from her with a furtive, frightened glance at her stony face.
Thea went slowly up the back stairs to her loft. Her legs seemed as
heavy as lead as she climbed the stairs, and she felt as if everything
inside her had solidified and grown hard.

After shutting her door and locking it, she sat down on the edge of her
bed. This place had always been her refuge, but there was a hostility in
the house now which this door could not shut out. This would be her last
summer in that room. Its services were over; its time was done. She rose
and put her hand on the low ceiling. Two tears ran down her cheeks, as
if they came from ice that melted slowly. She was not ready to leave her
little shell. She was being pulled out too soon. She would never be able
to think anywhere else as well as here. She would never sleep so well or
have such dreams in any other bed; even last night, such sweet,
breathless dreams--Thea hid her face in the pillow. Wherever she went
she would like to take that little bed with her. When she went away from
it for good, she would leave something that she could never recover;
memories of pleasant excitement, of happy adventures in her mind; of
warm sleep on howling winter nights, and joyous awakenings on summer
mornings. There were certain dreams that might refuse to come to her at
all except in a little morning cave, facing the sun--where they came to
her so powerfully, where they beat a triumph in her!

The room was hot as an oven. The sun was beating fiercely on the
shingles behind the board ceiling. She undressed, and before she threw
herself upon her bed in her chemise, she frowned at herself for a long
while in her looking-glass. Yes, she and It must fight it out together.
The thing that looked at her out of her own eyes was the only friend she
could count on. Oh, she would make these people sorry enough! There
would come a time when they would want to make it up with her. But,
never again! She had no little vanities, only one big one, and she would
never forgive.

Her mother was all right, but her mother was a part of the family, and
she was not. In the nature of things, her mother had to be on both
sides. Thea felt that she had been betrayed. A truce had been broken
behind her back. She had never had much individual affection for any of
her brothers except Thor, but she had never been disloyal, never felt
scorn or held grudges. As a little girl she had always been good friends
with Gunner and Axel, whenever she had time to play. Even before she got
her own room, when they were all sleeping and dressing together, like
little cubs, and breakfasting in the kitchen, she had led an absorbing
personal life of her own. But she had a cub loyalty to the other cubs.
She thought them nice boys and tried to make them get their lessons. She
once fought a bully who “picked on” Axel at school. She never made fun
of Anna's crimpings and curlings and beauty-rites.

Thea had always taken it for granted that her sister and brothers
recognized that she had special abilities, and that they were proud of
it. She had done them the honor, she told herself bitterly, to believe
that though they had no particular endowments, THEY WERE OF HER KIND,
and not of the Moonstone kind. Now they had all grown up and become
persons. They faced each other as individuals, and she saw that Anna and
Gus and Charley were among the people whom she had always recognized as
her natural enemies. Their ambitions and sacred proprieties were
meaningless to her. She had neglected to congratulate Charley upon
having been promoted from the grocery department of Commings's store to
the drygoods department. Her mother had reproved her for this omission.
And how was she to know, Thea asked herself, that Anna expected to be
teased because Bert Rice now came and sat in the hammock with her every
night ? No, it was all clear enough. Nothing that she would ever do in
the world would seem important to them, and nothing they would ever do
would seem important to her.

Thea lay thinking intently all through the stifling afternoon. Tillie
whispered something outside her door once, but she did not answer. She
lay on her bed until the second church bell rang, and she saw the family
go trooping up the sidewalk on the opposite side of the street, Anna and
her father in the lead. Anna seemed to have taken on a very story-book
attitude toward her father; patronizing and condescending, it seemed to
Thea. The older boys were not in the family band. They now took their
girls to church. Tillie had stayed at home to get supper. Thea got up,
washed her hot face and arms, and put on the white organdie dress she
had worn last night; it was getting too small for her, and she might as
well wear it out. After she was dressed she unlocked her door and went
cautiously downstairs. She felt as if chilling hostilities might be
awaiting her in the trunk loft, on the stairway, almost anywhere. In the
dining-room she found Tillie, sitting by the open window, reading the
dramatic news in a Denver Sunday paper. Tillie kept a scrapbook in which
she pasted clippings about actors and actresses.

“Come look at this picture of Pauline Hall in tights, Thea,” she called.
“Ain't she cute ? It's too bad you didn't go to the theater more when you
was in Chicago; such a good chance! Didn't you even get to see Clara
Morris or Modjeska ?”

“No; I didn't have time. Besides, it costs money, Tillie,” Thea replied
wearily, glancing at the paper Tillie held out to her.

Tillie looked up at her niece. “Don't you go and be upset about any of
Anna's notions. She's one of these narrow kind. Your father and mother
don't pay any attention to what she says. Anna's fussy; she is with me,
but I don't mind her.”

“Oh, I don't mind her. That's all right, Tillie. I guess I'll take a
walk.”

Thea knew that Tillie hoped she would stay and talk to her for a while,
and she would have liked to please her. But in a house as small as that
one, everything was too intimate and mixed up together. The family was
the family, an integral thing. One couldn't discuss Anna there. She felt
differently toward the house and everything in it, as if the battered
old furniture that seemed so kindly, and the old carpets on which she
had played, had been nourishing a secret grudge against her and were not
to be trusted any more.

She went aimlessly out of the front gate, not knowing what to do with
herself. Mexican Town, somehow, was spoiled for her just then, and she
felt that she would hide if she saw Silvo or Felipe coming toward her.
She walked down through the empty main street. All the stores were
closed, their blinds down. On the steps of the bank some idle boys were
sitting, telling disgusting stories because there was nothing else to
do. Several of them had gone to school with Thea, but when she nodded to
them they hung their heads and did not speak. Thea's body was often
curiously expressive of what was going on in her mind, and to-night
there was something in her walk and carriage that made these boys feel
that she was “stuck up.” If she had stopped and talked to them, they
would have thawed out on the instant and would have been friendly and
grateful. But Thea was hurt afresh, and walked on, holding her chin
higher than ever. As she passed the Duke Block, she saw a light in Dr.
Archie's office, and she went up the stairs and opened the door into his
study. She found him with a pile of papers and accountbooks before him.
He pointed her to her old chair at the end of his desk and leaned back
in his own, looking at her with satisfaction. How handsome she was
growing!

“I'm still chasing the elusive metal, Thea,”--he pointed to the papers
before him,--“I'm up to my neck in mines, and I'm going to be a rich man
some day.”

“I hope you will; awfully rich. That's the only thing that counts.” She
looked restlessly about the consulting-room. “To do any of the things one
wants to do, one has to have lots and lots of money.”

Dr. Archie was direct. “What's the matter ? Do you need some ?”

Thea shrugged. “Oh, I can get along, in a little way.” She looked
intently out of the window at the arc streetlamp that was just beginning
to sputter. “But it's silly to live at all for little things,” she added
quietly. “Living's too much trouble unless one can get something big out
of it.”

Dr. Archie rested his elbows on the arms of his chair, dropped his chin
on his clasped hands and looked at her. “Living is no trouble for little
people, believe me!” he exclaimed. “What do you want to get out of it ?”

“Oh--so many things!” Thea shivered.

“But what ? Money ? You mentioned that. Well, you can make money, if you
care about that more than anything else.” He nodded prophetically above
his interlacing fingers.

“But I don't. That's only one thing. Anyhow, I couldn't if I did.” She
pulled her dress lower at the neck as if she were suffocating. “I only
want impossible things,” she said roughly. “The others don't interest
me.”

Dr. Archie watched her contemplatively, as if she were a beaker full of
chemicals working. A few years ago, when she used to sit there, the
light from under his green lampshade used to fall full upon her broad
face and yellow pigtails. Now her face was in the shadow and the line of
light fell below her bare throat, directly across her bosom. The
shrunken white organdie rose and fell as if she were struggling to be
free and to break out of it altogether. He felt that her heart must be
laboring heavily in there, but he was afraid to touch her; he was,
indeed. He had never seen her like this before. Her hair, piled high on
her head, gave her a commanding look, and her eyes, that used to be so
inquisitive, were stormy.

“Thea,” he said slowly, “I won't say that you can have everything you
want--that means having nothing, in reality. But if you decide what it
is you want most, YOU CAN GET IT.” His eye caught hers for a moment.
“Not everybody can, but you can. Only, if you want a big thing, you've
got to have nerve enough to cut out all that's easy, everything that's
to be had cheap.” Dr. Archie paused. He picked up a paper-cutter and,
feeling the edge of it softly with his fingers, he added slowly, as if
to himself:--


“He either fears his fate too much, Or his deserts are small, Who dares
not put it to the touch To win...or lose it all.”


Thea's lips parted; she looked at him from under a frown, searching his
face. “Do you mean to break loose, too, and--do something ?” she asked
in a low voice.

“I mean to get rich, if you call that doing anything. I've found what I
can do without. You make such bargains in your mind, first.”

Thea sprang up and took the paper-cutter he had put down, twisting it in
her hands. “A long while first, sometimes,” she said with a short laugh.
“But suppose one can never get out what they've got in them ? Suppose
they make a mess of it in the end; then what ?” She threw the
paper-cutter on the desk and took a step toward the doctor, until her
dress touched him. She stood looking down at him. “Oh, it's easy to
fail!” She was breathing through her mouth and her throat was throbbing
with excitement.

As he looked up at her, Dr. Archie's hands tightened on the arms of his
chair. He had thought he knew Thea Kronborg pretty well, but he did not
know the girl who was standing there. She was beautiful, as his little
Swede had never been, but she frightened him. Her pale cheeks, her
parted lips, her flashing eyes, seemed suddenly to mean one thing--he
did not know what. A light seemed to break upon her from far away--or
perhaps from far within. She seemed to grow taller, like a scarf drawn
out long; looked as if she were pursued and fleeing, and--yes, she
looked tormented. “It's easy to fail,” he heard her say again, “and if I
fail, you'd better forget about me, for I'll be one of the worst women
that ever lived. I'll be an awful woman!”

In the shadowy light above the lampshade he caught her glance again and
held it for a moment. Wild as her eyes were, that yellow gleam at the
back of them was as hard as a diamond drill-point. He rose with a
nervous laugh and dropped his hand lightly on her shoulder. “No, you
won't. You'll be a splendid one!”

She shook him off before he could say anything more, and went out of his
door with a kind of bound. She left so quickly and so lightly that he
could not even hear her footstep in the hallway outside. Archie dropped
back into his chair and sat motionless for a long while.

So it went; one loved a quaint little girl, cheerful, industrious,
always on the run and hustling through her tasks; and suddenly one lost
her. He had thought he knew that child like the glove on his hand. But
about this tall girl who threw up her head and glittered like that all
over, he knew nothing. She was goaded by desires, ambitions, revulsions
that were dark to him. One thing he knew: the old highroad of life, worn
safe and easy, hugging the sunny slopes, would scarcely hold her again.

After that night Thea could have asked pretty much anything of him. He
could have refused her nothing. Years ago a crafty little bunch of hair
and smiles had shown him what she wanted, and he had promptly married
her. To-night a very different sort of girl--driven wild by doubts and
youth, by poverty and riches--had let him see the fierceness of her
nature. She went out still distraught, not knowing or caring what she
had shown him. But to Archie knowledge of that sort was obligation. Oh,
he was the same old Howard Archie!


That Sunday in July was the turning-point; Thea's peace of mind did not
come back. She found it hard even to practice at home. There was
something in the air there that froze her throat. In the morning, she
walked as far as she could walk. In the hot afternoons she lay on her
bed in her nightgown, planning fiercely. She haunted the post-office.
She must have worn a path in the sidewalk that led to the post-office,
that summer. She was there the moment the mail-sacks came up from the
depot, morning and evening, and while the letters were being sorted and
distributed she paced up and down outside, under the cottonwood trees,
listening to the thump, thump, thump of Mr. Thompson's stamp. She hung
upon any sort of word from Chicago; a card from Bowers, a letter from
Mrs. Harsanyi, from Mr. Larsen, from her landlady,--anything to reassure
her that Chicago was still there. She began to feel the same
restlessness that had tortured her the last spring when she was teaching
in Moonstone. Suppose she never got away again, after all ? Suppose one
broke a leg and had to lie in bed at home for weeks, or had pneumonia
and died there. The desert was so big and thirsty; if one's foot
slipped, it could drink one up like a drop of water.

This time, when Thea left Moonstone to go back to Chicago, she went
alone. As the train pulled out, she looked back at her mother and father
and Thor. They were calm and cheerful; they did not know, they did not
understand. Something pulled in her--and broke. She cried all the way to
Denver, and that night, in her berth, she kept sobbing and waking
herself. But when the sun rose in the morning, she was far away. It was
all behind her, and she knew that she would never cry like that again.
People live through such pain only once; pain comes again, but it finds
a tougher surface. Thea remembered how she had gone away the first time,
with what confidence in everything, and what pitiful ignorance. Such a
silly! She felt resentful toward that stupid, good-natured child. How
much older she was now, and how much harder! She was going away to
fight, and she was going away forever.





PART III. STUPID FACES




I

So many grinning, stupid faces! Thea was sitting by the window in
Bowers's studio, waiting for him to come back from lunch. On her knee
was the latest number of an illustrated musical journal in which
musicians great and little stridently advertised their wares. Every
afternoon she played accompaniments for people who looked and smiled
like these. She was getting tired of the human countenance.

Thea had been in Chicago for two months. She had a small church position
which partly paid her living expenses, and she paid for her singing
lessons by playing Bowers's accompaniments every afternoon from two
until six. She had been compelled to leave her old friends Mrs. Lorch
and Mrs. Andersen, because the long ride from North Chicago to Bowers's
studio on Michigan Avenue took too much time--an hour in the morning,
and at night, when the cars were crowded, an hour and a half. For the
first month she had clung to her old room, but the bad air in the cars,
at the end of a long day's work, fatigued her greatly and was bad for
her voice. Since she left Mrs. Lorch, she had been staying at a
students' club to which she was introduced by Miss Adler, Bowers's
morning accompanist, an intelligent Jewish girl from Evanston.

Thea took her lesson from Bowers every day from eleven-thirty until
twelve. Then she went out to lunch with an Italian grammar under her
arm, and came back to the studio to begin her work at two. In the
afternoon Bowers coached professionals and taught his advanced pupils.
It was his theory that Thea ought to be able to learn a great deal by
keeping her ears open while she played for him.

The concert-going public of Chicago still remembers the long, sallow,
discontented face of Madison Bowers. He seldom missed an evening
concert, and was usually to be seen lounging somewhere at the back of
the concert hall, reading a newspaper or review, and conspicuously
ignoring the efforts of the performers. At the end of a number he looked
up from his paper long enough to sweep the applauding audience with a
contemptuous eye. His face was intelligent, with a narrow lower jaw, a
thin nose, faded gray eyes, and a close-cut brown mustache. His hair was
iron-gray, thin and dead-looking. He went to concerts chiefly to satisfy
himself as to how badly things were done and how gullible the public
was. He hated the whole race of artists; the work they did, the wages
they got, and the way they spent their money. His father, old Hiram
Bowers, was still alive and at work, a genial old choirmaster in Boston,
full of enthusiasm at seventy. But Madison was of the colder stuff of
his grandfathers, a long line of New Hampshire farmers; hard workers,
close traders, with good minds, mean natures, and flinty eyes. As a boy
Madison had a fine barytone voice, and his father made great sacrifices
for him, sending him to Germany at an early age and keeping him abroad
at his studies for years. Madison worked under the best teachers, and
afterward sang in England in oratorio. His cold nature and academic
methods were against him. His audiences were always aware of the
contempt he felt for them. A dozen poorer singers succeeded, but Bowers
did not.

Bowers had all the qualities which go to make a good teacher--except
generosity and warmth. His intelligence was of a high order, his taste
never at fault. He seldom worked with a voice without improving it, and
in teaching the delivery of oratorio he was without a rival. Singers came
from far and near to study Bach and Handel with him. Even the fashionable
sopranos and contraltos of Chicago, St. Paul, and St. Louis (they were
usually ladies with very rich husbands, and Bowers called them the
“pampered jades of Asia”) humbly endured his sardonic humor for the sake
of what he could do for them. He was not at all above helping a very
lame singer across, if her husband's check-book warranted it. He had a
whole bag of tricks for stupid people, “life-preservers,” he called
them. “Cheap repairs for a cheap 'un,” he used to say, but the husbands
never found the repairs very cheap. Those were the days when lumbermen's
daughters and brewers' wives contended in song; studied in Germany and
then floated from SANGERFEST to SANGERFEST. Choral societies flourished
in all the rich lake cities and river cities. The soloists came to
Chicago to coach with Bowers, and he often took long journeys to hear
and instruct a chorus. He was intensely avaricious, and from these
semi-professionals he reaped a golden harvest. They fed his pockets and
they fed his ever-hungry contempt, his scorn of himself and his
accomplices. The more money he made, the more parsimonious he became.
His wife was so shabby that she never went anywhere with him, which
suited him exactly. Because his clients were luxurious and extravagant,
he took a revengeful pleasure in having his shoes halfsoled a second
time, and in getting the last wear out of a broken collar. He had first
been interested in Thea Kronborg because of her bluntness, her country
roughness, and her manifest carefulness about money. The mention of
Harsanyi's name always made him pull a wry face. For the first time Thea
had a friend who, in his own cool and guarded way, liked her for
whatever was least admirable in her.

Thea was still looking at the musical paper, her grammar unopened on the
window-sill, when Bowers sauntered in a little before two o'clock. He
was smoking a cheap cigarette and wore the same soft felt hat he had
worn all last winter. He never carried a cane or wore gloves.

Thea followed him from the reception-room into the studio. “I may cut my
lesson out to-morrow, Mr. Bowers. I have to hunt a new boarding-place.”

Bowers looked up languidly from his desk where he had begun to go over a
pile of letters. “What's the matter with the Studio Club ? Been fighting
with them again ?”

“The Club's all right for people who like to live that way. I don't.”

Bowers lifted his eyebrows. “Why so tempery ?” he asked as he drew a
check from an envelope postmarked “Minneapolis.”

“I can't work with a lot of girls around. They're too familiar. I never
could get along with girls of my own age. It's all too chummy. Gets on
my nerves. I didn't come here to play kindergarten games.” Thea began
energetically to arrange the scattered music on the piano.

Bowers grimaced good-humoredly at her over the three checks he was
pinning together. He liked to play at a rough game of banter with her.
He flattered himself that he had made her harsher than she was when she
first came to him; that he had got off a little of the sugar-coating
Harsanyi always put on his pupils.

“The art of making yourself agreeable never comes amiss, Miss Kronborg.
I should say you rather need a little practice along that line. When you
come to marketing your wares in the world, a little smoothness goes
farther than a great deal of talent sometimes. If you happen to be
cursed with a real talent, then you've got to be very smooth indeed, or
you'll never get your money back.” Bowers snapped the elastic band
around his bank-book.

Thea gave him a sharp, recognizing glance. “Well, that's the money I'll
have to go without,” she replied.

“Just what do you mean ?”

“I mean the money people have to grin for. I used to know a railroad man
who said there was money in every profession that you couldn't take.
He'd tried a good many jobs,” Thea added musingly; “perhaps he was too
particular about the kind he could take, for he never picked up much. He
was proud, but I liked him for that.”

Bowers rose and closed his desk. “Mrs. Priest is late again. By the way,
Miss Kronborg, remember not to frown when you are playing for Mrs.
Priest. You did not remember yesterday.”

“You mean when she hits a tone with her breath like that ? Why do you let
her ? You wouldn't let me.”

“I certainly would not. But that is a mannerism of Mrs. Priest's. The
public like it, and they pay a great deal of money for the pleasure of
hearing her do it. There she is. Remember!”

Bowers opened the door of the reception-room and a tall, imposing woman
rustled in, bringing with her a glow of animation which pervaded the
room as if half a dozen persons, all talking gayly, had come in instead
of one. She was large, handsome, expansive, uncontrolled; one felt this
the moment she crossed the threshold. She shone with care and
cleanliness, mature vigor, unchallenged authority, gracious good-humor,
and absolute confidence in her person, her powers, her position, and her
way of life; a glowing, overwhelming self-satisfaction, only to be found
where human society is young and strong and without yesterdays. Her face
had a kind of heavy, thoughtless beauty, like a pink peony just at the
point of beginning to fade. Her brown hair was waved in front and done
up behind in a great twist, held by a tortoiseshell comb with gold
filigree. She wore a beautiful little green hat with three long green
feathers sticking straight up in front, a little cape made of velvet and
fur with a yellow satin rose on it. Her gloves, her shoes, her veil,
somehow made themselves felt. She gave the impression of wearing a cargo
of splendid merchandise.

Mrs. Priest nodded graciously to Thea, coquettishly to Bowers, and asked
him to untie her veil for her. She threw her splendid wrap on a chair,
the yellow lining out. Thea was already at the piano. Mrs. Priest stood
behind her.

“'Rejoice Greatly' first, please. And please don't hurry it in there,”
 she put her arm over Thea's shoulder, and indicated the passage by a
sweep of her white glove. She threw out her chest, clasped her hands
over her abdomen, lifted her chin, worked the muscles of her cheeks back
and forth for a moment, and then began with conviction, “Re-jo-oice!
Re-jo-oice!”

Bowers paced the room with his catlike tread. When he checked Mrs.
Priest's vehemence at all, he handled her roughly; poked and hammered
her massive person with cold satisfaction, almost as if he were taking
out a grudge on this splendid creation. Such treatment the imposing lady
did not at all resent. She tried harder and harder, her eyes growing all
the while more lustrous and her lips redder. Thea played on as she was
told, ignoring the singer's struggles.

When she first heard Mrs. Priest sing in church, Thea admired her. Since
she had found out how dull the goodnatured soprano really was, she felt
a deep contempt for her. She felt that Mrs. Priest ought to be reproved
and even punished for her shortcomings; that she ought to be
exposed,--at least to herself,--and not be permitted to live and shine
in happy ignorance of what a poor thing it was she brought across so
radiantly. Thea's cold looks of reproof were lost upon Mrs. Priest;
although the lady did murmur one day when she took Bowers home in her
carriage, “How handsome your afternoon girl would be if she did not have
that unfortunate squint; it gives her that vacant Swede look, like an
animal.” That amused Bowers. He liked to watch the germination and
growth of antipathies.


One of the first disappointments Thea had to face when she returned to
Chicago that fall, was the news that the Harsanyis were not coming back.
They had spent the summer in a camp in the Adirondacks and were moving
to New York. An old teacher and friend of Harsanyi's, one of the
best-known piano teachers in New York, was about to retire because of
failing health and had arranged to turn his pupils over to Harsanyi.
Andor was to give two recitals in New York in November, to devote
himself to his new students until spring, and then to go on a short
concert tour. The Harsanyis had taken a furnished apartment in New York,
as they would not attempt to settle a place of their own until Andor's
recitals were over. The first of December, however, Thea received a note
from Mrs. Harsanyi, asking her to call at the old studio, where she was
packing their goods for shipment.

The morning after this invitation reached her, Thea climbed the stairs
and knocked at the familiar door. Mrs. Harsanyi herself opened it, and
embraced her visitor warmly. Taking Thea into the studio, which was
littered with excelsior and packing-cases, she stood holding her hand
and looking at her in the strong light from the big window before she
allowed her to sit down. Her quick eye saw many changes. The girl was
taller, her figure had become definite, her carriage positive. She had
got used to living in the body of a young woman, and she no longer tried
to ignore it and behave as if she were a little girl. With that
increased independence of body there had come a change in her face; an
indifference, something hard and skeptical. Her clothes, too, were
different, like the attire of a shopgirl who tries to follow the
fashions; a purple suit, a piece of cheap fur, a three-cornered purple
hat with a pompon sticking up in front. The queer country clothes she
used to wear suited her much better, Mrs. Harsanyi thought. But such
trifles, after all, were accidental and remediable. She put her hand on
the girl's strong shoulder.

“How much the summer has done for you! Yes, you are a young lady at
last. Andor will be so glad to hear about you.”

Thea looked about at the disorder of the familiar room. The pictures
were piled in a corner, the piano and the CHAISE LONGUE were gone. “I
suppose I ought to be glad you have gone away,” she said, “but I'm not.
It's a fine thing for Mr. Harsanyi, I suppose.”

Mrs. Harsanyi gave her a quick glance that said more than words. “If you
knew how long I have wanted to get him away from here, Miss Kronborg! He
is never tired, never discouraged, now.”

Thea sighed. “I'm glad for that, then.” Her eyes traveled over the faint
discolorations on the walls where the pictures had hung. “I may run away
myself. I don't know whether I can stand it here without you.”

“We hope that you can come to New York to study before very long. We
have thought of that. And you must tell me how you are getting on with
Bowers. Andor will want to know all about it.”

“I guess I get on more or less. But I don't like my work very well. It
never seems serious as my work with Mr. Harsanyi did. I play Bowers's
accompaniments in the afternoons, you know. I thought I would learn a
good deal from the people who work with him, but I don't think I get
much.”

Mrs. Harsanyi looked at her inquiringly. Thea took out a carefully
folded handkerchief from the bosom of her dress and began to draw the
corners apart. “Singing doesn't seem to be a very brainy profession,
Mrs. Harsanyi,” she said slowly. “The people I see now are not a bit
like the ones I used to meet here. Mr. Harsanyi's pupils, even the dumb
ones, had more--well, more of everything, it seems to me. The people I
have to play accompaniments for are discouraging. The professionals,
like Katharine Priest and Miles Murdstone, are worst of all. If I have
to play 'The Messiah' much longer for Mrs. Priest, I'll go out of my
mind!” Thea brought her foot down sharply on the bare floor.

Mrs. Harsanyi looked down at the foot in perplexity. “You mustn't wear
such high heels, my dear. They will spoil your walk and make you mince
along. Can't you at least learn to avoid what you dislike in these
singers ? I was never able to care for Mrs. Priest's singing.”

Thea was sitting with her chin lowered. Without moving her head she
looked up at Mrs. Harsanyi and smiled; a smile much too cold and
desperate to be seen on a young face, Mrs. Harsanyi felt. “Mrs.
Harsanyi, it seems to me that what I learn is just TO DISLIKE. I dislike
so much and so hard that it tires me out. I've got no heart for
anything.” She threw up her head suddenly and sat in defiance, her hand
clenched on the arm of the chair. “Mr. Harsanyi couldn't stand these
people an hour, I know he couldn't. He'd put them right out of the
window there, frizzes and feathers and all. Now, take that new soprano
they're all making such a fuss about, Jessie Darcey. She's going on tour
with a symphony orchestra and she's working up her repertory with
Bowers. She's singing some Schumann songs Mr. Harsanyi used to go over
with me. Well, I don't know what he WOULD do if he heard her.”

“But if your own work goes well, and you know these people are wrong,
why do you let them discourage you ?”

Thea shook her head. “That's just what I don't understand myself. Only,
after I've heard them all afternoon, I come out frozen up. Somehow it
takes the shine off of everything. People want Jessie Darcey and the
kind of thing she does; so what's the use ?”

Mrs. Harsanyi smiled. “That stile you must simply vault over. You must
not begin to fret about the successes of cheap people. After all,
what have they to do with you ?”

“Well, if I had somebody like Mr. Harsanyi, perhaps I wouldn't fret
about them. He was the teacher for me. Please tell him so.”

Thea rose and Mrs. Harsanyi took her hand again. “I am sorry you have to
go through this time of discouragement. I wish Andor could talk to you,
he would understand it so well. But I feel like urging you to keep clear
of Mrs. Priest and Jessie Darcey and all their works.”

Thea laughed discordantly. “No use urging me. I don't get on with them
AT ALL. My spine gets like a steel rail when they come near me. I liked
them at first, you know. Their clothes and their manners were so fine,
and Mrs. Priest IS handsome. But now I keep wanting to tell them how
stupid they are. Seems like they ought to be informed, don't you think
so ?” There was a flash of the shrewd grin that Mrs. Harsanyi remembered.
Thea pressed her hand. “I must go now. I had to give my lesson hour this
morning to a Duluth woman who has come on to coach, and I must go and
play 'On Mighty Pens' for her. Please tell Mr. Harsanyi that I think
oratorio is a great chance for bluffers.”

Mrs. Harsanyi detained her. “But he will want to know much more than
that about you. You are free at seven ? Come back this evening, then, and
we will go to dinner somewhere, to some cheerful place. I think you need
a party.”

Thea brightened. “Oh, I do! I'll love to come; that will be like old
times. You see,” she lingered a moment, softening, “I wouldn't mind if
there were only ONE of them I could really admire.”

“How about Bowers ?” Mrs. Harsanyi asked as they were approaching the
stairway.

“Well, there's nothing he loves like a good fakir, and nothing he hates
like a good artist. I always remember something Mr. Harsanyi said about
him. He said Bowers was the cold muffin that had been left on the
plate.”

Mrs. Harsanyi stopped short at the head of the stairs and said
decidedly: “I think Andor made a mistake. I can't believe that is the
right atmosphere for you. It would hurt you more than most people. It's
all wrong.”

“Something's wrong,” Thea called back as she clattered down the stairs
in her high heels.




II

DURING that winter Thea lived in so many places that sometimes at night
when she left Bowers's studio and emerged into the street she had to
stop and think for a moment to remember where she was living now and
what was the best way to get there.

When she moved into a new place her eyes challenged the beds, the
carpets, the food, the mistress of the house. The boarding-houses were
wretchedly conducted and Thea's complaints sometimes took an insulting
form. She quarreled with one landlady after another and moved on. When
she moved into a new room, she was almost sure to hate it on sight and
to begin planning to hunt another place before she unpacked her trunk.
She was moody and contemptuous toward her fellow boarders, except toward
the young men, whom she treated with a careless familiarity which they
usually misunderstood. They liked her, however, and when she left the
house after a storm, they helped her to move her things and came to see
her after she got settled in a new place. But she moved so often that
they soon ceased to follow her. They could see no reason for keeping up
with a girl who, under her jocularity, was cold, self-centered, and
unimpressionable. They soon felt that she did not admire them.

Thea used to waken up in the night and wonder why she was so unhappy.
She would have been amazed if she had known how much the people whom she
met in Bowers's studio had to do with her low spirits. She had never
been conscious of those instinctive standards which are called ideals,
and she did not know that she was suffering for them. She often found
herself sneering when she was on a street-car, or when she was brushing
out her hair before her mirror, as some inane remark or too familiar
mannerism flitted across her mind.

She felt no creature kindness, no tolerant good-will for Mrs. Priest or
Jessie Darcey. After one of Jessie Darcey's concerts the glowing press
notices, and the admiring comments that floated about Bowers's studio,
caused Thea bitter unhappiness. It was not the torment of personal
jealousy. She had never thought of herself as even a possible rival of
Miss Darcey. She was a poor music student, and Jessie Darcey was a
popular and petted professional. Mrs. Priest, whatever one held against
her, had a fine, big, showy voice and an impressive presence. She read
indifferently, was inaccurate, and was always putting other people
wrong, but she at least had the material out of which singers can be
made. But people seemed to like Jessie Darcey exactly because she could
not sing; because, as they put it, she was “so natural and
unprofessional.” Her singing was pronounced “artless,” her voice
“birdlike.” Miss Darcey was thin and awkward in person, with a sharp,
sallow face. Thea noticed that her plainness was accounted to her
credit, and that people spoke of it affectionately. Miss Darcey was
singing everywhere just then; one could not help hearing about her. She
was backed by some of the packing-house people and by the Chicago
Northwestern Railroad. Only one critic raised his voice against her.
Thea went to several of Jessie Darcey's concerts. It was the first time
she had had an opportunity to observe the whims of the public which
singers live by interesting. She saw that people liked in Miss Darcey
every quality a singer ought not to have, and especially the nervous
complacency that stamped her as a commonplace young woman. They seemed
to have a warmer feeling for Jessie than for Mrs. Priest, an
affectionate and cherishing regard. Chicago was not so very different
from Moonstone, after all, and Jessie Darcey was only Lily Fisher under
another name.

Thea particularly hated to accompany for Miss Darcey because she sang
off pitch and didn't mind it in the least. It was excruciating to sit
there day after day and hear her; there was something shameless and
indecent about not singing true.

One morning Miss Darcey came by appointment to go over the programme for
her Peoria concert. She was such a frail-looking girl that Thea ought to
have felt sorry for her. True, she had an arch, sprightly little manner,
and a flash of salmon-pink on either brown cheek. But a narrow upper jaw
gave her face a pinched look, and her eyelids were heavy and relaxed. By
the morning light, the purplish brown circles under her eyes were
pathetic enough, and foretold no long or brilliant future. A singer with
a poor digestion and low vitality; she needed no seer to cast her
horoscope. If Thea had ever taken the pains to study her, she would have
seen that, under all her smiles and archness, poor Miss Darcey was
really frightened to death. She could not understand her success any
more than Thea could; she kept catching her breath and lifting her
eyebrows and trying to believe that it was true. Her loquacity was not
natural, she forced herself to it, and when she confided to you how many
defects she could overcome by her unusual command of head resonance, she
was not so much trying to persuade you as to persuade herself.

When she took a note that was high for her, Miss Darcey always put her
right hand out into the air, as if she were indicating height, or giving
an exact measurement. Some early teacher had told her that she could
“place” a tone more surely by the help of such a gesture, and she firmly
believed that it was of great assistance to her. (Even when she was
singing in public, she kept her right hand down with difficulty,
nervously clasping her white kid fingers together when she took a high
note. Thea could always see her elbows stiffen.) She unvaryingly
executed this gesture with a smile of gracious confidence, as if she
were actually putting her finger on the tone: “There it is, friends!”

This morning, in Gounod's “Ave Maria,” as Miss Darcey approached her B
natural:--

DANS--NOS--A--LAR--MES!

Out went the hand, with the sure airy gesture, though it was little
above A she got with her voice, whatever she touched with her finger.
Often Bowers let such things pass--with the right people--but this
morning he snapped his jaws together and muttered, “God!” Miss Darcey
tried again, with the same gesture as of putting the crowning touch,
tilting her head and smiling radiantly at Bowers, as if to say, “It is
for you I do all this!”


DANS--NOS A--LAR------MES!

This time she made B flat, and went on in the happy belief that she had
done well enough, when she suddenly found that her accompanist was not
going on with her, and this put her out completely.

She turned to Thea, whose hands had fallen in her lap. “Oh why did you
stop just there! It IS too trying! Now we'd better go back to that other
CRESCENDO and try it from there.”

“I beg your pardon,” Thea muttered. “I thought you wanted to get that B
natural.” She began again, as Miss Darcey indicated.

After the singer was gone, Bowers walked up to Thea and asked languidly,
“Why do you hate Jessie so ? Her little variations from pitch are between
her and her public; they don't hurt you. Has she ever done anything to
you except be very agreeable ?”

“Yes, she has done things to me,” Thea retorted hotly.

Bowers looked interested. “What, for example ?”

“I can't explain, but I've got it in for her.”

Bowers laughed. “No doubt about that. I'll have to suggest that you
conceal it a little more effectually. That is--necessary, Miss
Kronborg,” he added, looking back over the shoulder of the overcoat he
was putting on.

He went out to lunch and Thea thought the subject closed. But late in
the afternoon, when he was taking his dyspepsia tablet and a glass of
water between lessons, he looked up and said in a voice ironically
coaxing:--

“Miss Kronborg, I wish you would tell me why you hate Jessie.”

Taken by surprise Thea put down the score she was reading and answered
before she knew what she was saying, “I hate her for the sake of what I
used to think a singer might be.”

Bowers balanced the tablet on the end of his long forefinger and
whistled softly. “And how did you form your conception of what a singer
ought to be ?” he asked.

“I don't know.” Thea flushed and spoke under her breath; “but I suppose
I got most of it from Harsanyi.”

Bowers made no comment upon this reply, but opened the door for the next
pupil, who was waiting in the reception-room.

It was dark when Thea left the studio that night. She knew she had
offended Bowers. Somehow she had hurt herself, too. She felt unequal to
the boarding-house table, the sneaking divinity student who sat next her
and had tried to kiss her on the stairs last night. She went over to the
waterside of Michigan Avenue and walked along beside the lake. It was a
clear, frosty winter night. The great empty space over the water was
restful and spoke of freedom. If she had any money at all, she would go
away. The stars glittered over the wide black water. She looked up at
them wearily and shook her head. She believed that what she felt was
despair, but it was only one of the forms of hope. She felt, indeed, as
if she were bidding the stars good-bye; but she was renewing a promise.
Though their challenge is universal and eternal, the stars get no answer
but that,--the brief light flashed back to them from the eyes of the
young who unaccountably aspire.

The rich, noisy, city, fat with food and drink, is a spent thing; its
chief concern is its digestion and its little game of hide-and-seek with
the undertaker. Money and office and success are the consolations of
impotence. Fortune turns kind to such solid people and lets them suck
their bone in peace. She flecks her whip upon flesh that is more alive,
upon that stream of hungry boys and girls who tramp the streets of every
city, recognizable by their pride and discontent, who are the Future,
and who possess the treasure of creative power.




III

WHILE her living arrangements were so casual and fortuitous, Bowers's
studio was the one fixed thing in Thea's life. She went out from it to
uncertainties, and hastened to it from nebulous confusion. She was more
influenced by Bowers than she knew. Unconsciously she began to take on
something of his dry contempt, and to share his grudge without
understanding exactly what it was about. His cynicism seemed to her
honest, and the amiability of his pupils artificial. She admired his
drastic treatment of his dull pupils. The stupid deserved all they got,
and more. Bowers knew that she thought him a very clever man.

One afternoon when Bowers came in from lunch Thea handed him a card on
which he read the name, “Mr. Philip Frederick Ottenburg.”

“He said he would be in again to-morrow and that he wanted some time.
Who is he ? I like him better than the others.”

Bowers nodded. “So do I. He's not a singer. He's a beer prince: son of
the big brewer in St. Louis. He's been in Germany with his mother. I
didn't know he was back.”

“Does he take lessons ?”

“Now and again. He sings rather well. He's at the head of the Chicago
branch of the Ottenburg business, but he can't stick to work and is
always running away. He has great ideas in beer, people tell me. He's
what they call an imaginative business man; goes over to Bayreuth and
seems to do nothing but give parties and spend money, and brings back
more good notions for the brewery than the fellows who sit tight dig out
in five years. I was born too long ago to be much taken in by these
chesty boys with flowered vests, but I like Fred, all the same.”

“So do I,” said Thea positively.

Bowers made a sound between a cough and a laugh. “Oh, he's a
lady-killer, all right! The girls in here are always making eyes at him.
You won't be the first.” He threw some sheets of music on the piano.
“Better look that over; accompaniment's a little tricky. It's for that
new woman from Detroit. And Mrs. Priest will be in this afternoon.”

Thea sighed. “'I Know that my Redeemer Liveth' ?”

“The same. She starts on her concert tour next week, and we'll have a
rest. Until then, I suppose we'll have to be going over her programme.”

The next day Thea hurried through her luncheon at a German bakery and
got back to the studio at ten minutes past one. She felt sure that the
young brewer would come early, before it was time for Bowers to arrive.
He had not said he would, but yesterday, when he opened the door to go,
he had glanced about the room and at her, and something in his eye had
conveyed that suggestion.

Sure enough, at twenty minutes past one the door of the reception-room
opened, and a tall, robust young man with a cane and an English hat and
ulster looked in expectantly. “Ah--ha!” he exclaimed, “I thought if I
came early I might have good luck. And how are you to-day, Miss
Kronborg ?”

Thea was sitting in the window chair. At her left elbow there was a
table, and upon this table the young man sat down, holding his hat and
cane in his hand, loosening his long coat so that it fell back from his
shoulders. He was a gleaming, florid young fellow. His hair, thick and
yellow, was cut very short, and he wore a closely trimmed beard, long
enough on the chin to curl a little. Even his eyebrows were thick and
yellow, like fleece. He had lively blue eyes--Thea looked up at them
with great interest as he sat chatting and swinging his foot
rhythmically. He was easily familiar, and frankly so. Wherever people
met young Ottenburg, in his office, on shipboard, in a foreign hotel or
railway compartment, they always felt (and usually liked) that artless
presumption which seemed to say, “In this case we may waive formalities.
We really haven't time. This is to-day, but it will soon be to-morrow,
and then we may be very different people, and in some other country.” He
had a way of floating people out of dull or awkward situations, out of
their own torpor or constraint or discouragement. It was a marked
personal talent, of almost incalculable value in the representative of a
great business founded on social amenities. Thea had liked him yesterday
for the way in which he had picked her up out of herself and her German
grammar for a few exciting moments.

“By the way, will you tell me your first name, please ? Thea ? Oh, then
you ARE a Swede, sure enough! I thought so. Let me call you Miss Thea,
after the German fashion. You won't mind ? Of course not!” He usually
made his assumption of a special understanding seem a tribute to the
other person and not to himself.

“How long have you been with Bowers here ? Do you like the old grouch ? So
do I. I've come to tell him about a new soprano I heard at Bayreuth.
He'll pretend not to care, but he does. Do you warble with him ? Have you
anything of a voice ? Honest ? You look it, you know. What are you going
in for, something big ? Opera ?”

Thea blushed crimson. “Oh, I'm not going in for anything. I'm trying to
learn to sing at funerals.”

Ottenburg leaned forward. His eyes twinkled. “I'll engage you to sing at
mine. You can't fool me, Miss Thea. May I hear you take your lesson this
afternoon ?”

“No, you may not. I took it this morning.”

He picked up a roll of music that lay behind him on the table. “Is this
yours ? Let me see what you are doing.”

He snapped back the clasp and began turning over the songs. “All very
fine, but tame. What's he got you at this Mozart stuff for ? I shouldn't
think it would suit your voice. Oh, I can make a pretty good guess at
what will suit you! This from 'Gioconda' is more in your line. What's
this Grieg ? It looks interesting. TAK FOR DITT ROD. What does that
mean ?”

“'Thanks for your Advice.' Don't you know it ?”

“No; not at all. Let's try it.” He rose, pushed open the door into the
music-room, and motioned Thea to enter before him. She hung back.

“I couldn't give you much of an idea of it. It's a big song.”

Ottenburg took her gently by the elbow and pushed her into the other
room. He sat down carelessly at the piano and looked over the music for
a moment. “I think I can get you through it. But how stupid not to have
the German words. Can you really sing the Norwegian ? What an infernal
language to sing. Translate the text for me.” He handed her the music.

Thea looked at it, then at him, and shook her head. “I can't. The truth
is I don't know either English or Swedish very well, and Norwegian's
still worse,” she said confidentially. She not infrequently refused to
do what she was asked to do, but it was not like her to explain her
refusal, even when she had a good reason.

“I understand. We immigrants never speak any language well. But you know
what it means, don't you ?”

“Of course I do!”

“Then don't frown at me like that, but tell me.”

Thea continued to frown, but she also smiled. She was confused, but not
embarrassed. She was not afraid of Ottenburg. He was not one of those
people who made her spine like a steel rail. On the contrary, he made
one venturesome.

“Well, it goes something like this: Thanks for your advice! But I prefer
to steer my boat into the din of roaring breakers. Even if the journey
is my last, I may find what I have never found before. Onward must I go,
for I yearn for the wild sea. I long to fight my way through the angry
waves, and to see how far, and how long I can make them carry me.”

Ottenburg took the music and began: “Wait a moment. Is that too fast ?
How do you take it ? That right ?” He pulled up his cuffs and began the
accompaniment again. He had become entirely serious, and he played with
fine enthusiasm and with understanding.

Fred's talent was worth almost as much to old Otto Ottenburg as the
steady industry of his older sons. When Fred sang the Prize Song at an
interstate meet of the TURNVEREIN, ten thousand TURNERS went forth
pledged to Ottenburg beer.

As Thea finished the song Fred turned back to the first page, without
looking up from the music. “Now, once more,” he called. They began
again, and did not hear Bowers when he came in and stood in the doorway.
He stood still, blinking like an owl at their two heads shining in the
sun. He could not see their faces, but there was something about his
girl's back that he had not noticed before: a very slight and yet very
free motion, from the toes up. Her whole back seemed plastic, seemed to
be moulding itself to the galloping rhythm of the song. Bowers perceived
such things sometimes--unwillingly. He had known to-day that there was
something afoot. The river of sound which had its source in his pupil
had caught him two flights down. He had stopped and listened with a kind
of sneering admiration. From the door he watched her with a
half-incredulous, half-malicious smile.

When he had struck the keys for the last time, Ottenburg dropped his
hands on his knees and looked up with a quick breath. “I got you
through. What a stunning song! Did I play it right ?”

Thea studied his excited face. There was a good deal of meaning in it,
and there was a good deal in her own as she answered him. “You suited
me,” she said ungrudgingly.

After Ottenburg was gone, Thea noticed that Bowers was more agreeable
than usual. She had heard the young brewer ask Bowers to dine with him
at his club that evening, and she saw that he looked forward to the
dinner with pleasure. He dropped a remark to the effect that Fred knew
as much about food and wines as any man in Chicago. He said this
boastfully.

“If he's such a grand business man, how does he have time to run around
listening to singing-lessons ?” Thea asked suspiciously.

As she went home to her boarding-house through the February slush, she
wished she were going to dine with them. At nine o'clock she looked up
from her grammar to wonder what Bowers and Ottenburg were having to eat.
At that moment they were talking of her.




IV

THEA noticed that Bowers took rather more pains with her now that Fred
Ottenburg often dropped in at eleven-thirty to hear her lesson. After
the lesson the young man took Bowers off to lunch with him, and Bowers
liked good food when another man paid for it. He encouraged Fred's
visits, and Thea soon saw that Fred knew exactly why.

One morning, after her lesson, Ottenburg turned to Bowers. “If you'll
lend me Miss Thea, I think I have an engagement for her. Mrs. Henry
Nathanmeyer is going to give three musical evenings in April, first
three Saturdays, and she has consulted me about soloists. For the first
evening she has a young violinist, and she would be charmed to have Miss
Kronborg. She will pay fifty dollars. Not much, but Miss Thea would meet
some people there who might be useful. What do you say ?”

Bowers passed the question on to Thea. “I guess you could use the fifty,
couldn't you, Miss Kronborg ? You can easily work up some songs.”

Thea was perplexed. “I need the money awfully,” she said frankly; “but I
haven't got the right clothes for that sort of thing. I suppose I'd
better try to get some.”

Ottenburg spoke up quickly, “Oh, you'd make nothing out of it if you
went to buying evening clothes. I've thought of that. Mrs. Nathanmeyer
has a troop of daughters, a perfect seraglio, all ages and sizes. She'll
be glad to fit you out, if you aren't sensitive about wearing kosher
clothes. Let me take you to see her, and you'll find that she'll arrange
that easily enough. I told her she must produce something nice, blue or
yellow, and properly cut. I brought half a dozen Worth gowns through the
customs for her two weeks ago, and she's not ungrateful. When can we go
to see her ?”

“I haven't any time free, except at night,” Thea replied in some
confusion.

“To-morrow evening, then ? I shall call for you at eight. Bring all your
songs along; she will want us to give her a little rehearsal, perhaps.
I'll play your accompaniments, if you've no objection. That will save
money for you and for Mrs. Nathanmeyer. She needs it.” Ottenburg
chuckled as he took down the number of Thea's boarding-house.

The Nathanmeyers were so rich and great that even Thea had heard of
them, and this seemed a very remarkable opportunity. Ottenburg had
brought it about by merely lifting a finger, apparently. He was a beer
prince sure enough, as Bowers had said.

The next evening at a quarter to eight Thea was dressed and waiting in
the boarding-house parlor. She was nervous and fidgety and found it
difficult to sit still on the hard, convex upholstery of the chairs. She
tried them one after another, moving about the dimly lighted, musty
room, where the gas always leaked gently and sang in the burners. There
was no one in the parlor but the medical student, who was playing one of
Sousa's marches so vigorously that the china ornaments on the top of the
piano rattled. In a few moments some of the pension-office girls would
come in and begin to two-step. Thea wished that Ottenburg would come and
let her escape. She glanced at herself in the long, somber mirror. She
was wearing her pale-blue broadcloth church dress, which was not
unbecoming but was certainly too heavy to wear to anybody's house in the
evening. Her slippers were run over at the heel and she had not had time
to have them mended, and her white gloves were not so clean as they
should be. However, she knew that she would forget these annoying things
as soon as Ottenburg came.

Mary, the Hungarian chambermaid, came to the door, stood between the
plush portieres, beckoned to Thea, and made an inarticulate sound in her
throat. Thea jumped up and ran into the hall, where Ottenburg stood
smiling, his caped cloak open, his silk hat in his white-kid hand. The
Hungarian girl stood like a monument on her flat heels, staring at the
pink carnation in Ottenburg's coat. Her broad, pockmarked face wore the
only expression of which it was capable, a kind of animal wonder. As the
young man followed Thea out, he glanced back over his shoulder through
the crack of the door; the Hun clapped her hands over her stomach,
opened her mouth, and made another raucous sound in her throat.

“Isn't she awful ?” Thea exclaimed. “I think she's half-witted. Can you
understand her ?”

Ottenburg laughed as he helped her into the carriage. “Oh, yes; I can
understand her!” He settled himself on the front seat opposite Thea.
“Now, I want to tell you about the people we are going to see. We may
have a musical public in this country some day, but as yet there are
only the Germans and the Jews. All the other people go to hear Jessie
Darcey sing, 'O, Promise Me!' The Nathanmeyers are the finest kind of
Jews. If you do anything for Mrs. Henry Nathanmeyer, you must put
yourself into her hands. Whatever she says about music, about clothes,
about life, will be correct. And you may feel at ease with her. She
expects nothing of people; she has lived in Chicago twenty years. If you
were to behave like the Magyar who was so interested in my buttonhole,
she would not be surprised. If you were to sing like Jessie Darcey, she
would not be surprised; but she would manage not to hear you again.”

“Would she ? Well, that's the kind of people I want to find.” Thea felt
herself growing bolder.

“You will be all right with her so long as you do not try to be anything
that you are not. Her standards have nothing to do with Chicago. Her
perceptions--or her grandmother's, which is the same thing--were keen
when all this was an Indian village. So merely be yourself, and you will
like her. She will like you because the Jews always sense talent, and,”
 he added ironically, “they admire certain qualities of feeling that are
found only in the white-skinned races.”

Thea looked into the young man's face as the light of a street lamp
flashed into the carriage. His somewhat academic manner amused her.

“What makes you take such an interest in singers ?” she asked curiously.
“You seem to have a perfect passion for hearing music-lessons. I wish I
could trade jobs with you!”

“I'm not interested in singers.” His tone was offended. “I am interested
in talent. There are only two interesting things in the world, anyhow;
and talent is one of them.”

“What's the other ?” The question came meekly from the figure opposite
him. Another arc-light flashed in at the window.

Fred saw her face and broke into a laugh. “Why, you're guying me, you
little wretch! You won't let me behave properly.” He dropped his gloved
hand lightly on her knee, took it away and let it hang between his own.
“Do you know,” he said confidentially, “I believe I'm more in earnest
about all this than you are.”

“About all what ?”

“All you've got in your throat there.”

“Oh! I'm in earnest all right; only I never was much good at talking.
Jessie Darcey is the smooth talker. 'You notice the effect I get
there--' If she only got 'em, she'd be a wonder, you know!”

Mr. and Mrs. Nathanmeyer were alone in their great library. Their three
unmarried daughters had departed in successive carriages, one to a
dinner, one to a Nietszche club, one to a ball given for the girls
employed in the big department stores. When Ottenburg and Thea entered,
Henry Nathanmeyer and his wife were sitting at a table at the farther
end of the long room, with a reading-lamp and a tray of cigarettes and
cordial-glasses between them. The overhead lights were too soft to bring
out the colors of the big rugs, and none of the picture lights were on.
One could merely see that there were pictures there. Fred whispered that
they were Rousseaus and Corots, very fine ones which the old banker had
bought long ago for next to nothing. In the hall Ottenburg had stopped
Thea before a painting of a woman eating grapes out of a paper bag, and
had told her gravely that there was the most beautiful Manet in the
world. He made her take off her hat and gloves in the hall, and looked
her over a little before he took her in. But once they were in the
library he seemed perfectly satisfied with her and led her down the long
room to their hostess.

Mrs. Nathanmeyer was a heavy, powerful old Jewess, with a great
pompadour of white hair, a swarthy complexion, an eagle nose, and sharp,
glittering eyes. She wore a black velvet dress with a long train, and a
diamond necklace and earrings. She took Thea to the other side of the
table and presented her to Mr. Nathanmeyer, who apologized for not
rising, pointing to a slippered foot on a cushion; he said that he
suffered from gout. He had a very soft voice and spoke with an accent
which would have been heavy if it had not been so caressing. He kept
Thea standing beside him for some time. He noticed that she stood
easily, looked straight down into his face, and was not embarrassed.
Even when Mrs. Nathanmeyer told Ottenburg to bring a chair for Thea, the
old man did not release her hand, and she did not sit down. He admired
her just as she was, as she happened to be standing, and she felt it. He
was much handsomer than his wife, Thea thought. His forehead was high,
his hair soft and white, his skin pink, a little puffy under his clear
blue eyes. She noticed how warm and delicate his hands were, pleasant to
touch and beautiful to look at. Ottenburg had told her that Mr.
Nathanmeyer had a very fine collection of medals and cameos, and his
fingers looked as if they had never touched anything but delicately cut
surfaces.

He asked Thea where Moonstone was; how many inhabitants it had; what her
father's business was; from what part of Sweden her grandfather came;
and whether she spoke Swedish as a child. He was interested to hear that
her mother's mother was still living, and that her grandfather had
played the oboe. Thea felt at home standing there beside him; she felt
that he was very wise, and that he some way took one's life up and
looked it over kindly, as if it were a story. She was sorry when they
left him to go into the music-room.

As they reached the door of the music-room, Mrs. Nathanmeyer turned a
switch that threw on many lights. The room was even larger than the
library, all glittering surfaces, with two Steinway pianos.

Mrs. Nathanmeyer rang for her own maid. “Selma will take you upstairs,
Miss Kronborg, and you will find some dresses on the bed. Try several of
them, and take the one you like best. Selma will help you. She has a
great deal of taste. When you are dressed, come down and let us go over
some of your songs with Mr. Ottenburg.”

After Thea went away with the maid, Ottenburg came up to Mrs.
Nathanmeyer and stood beside her, resting his hand on the high back of
her chair.

“Well, GNADIGE FRAU, do you like her ?”

“I think so. I liked her when she talked to father. She will always get
on better with men.”

Ottenburg leaned over her chair. “Prophetess! Do you see what I meant ?”

“About her beauty ? She has great possibilities, but you can never tell
about those Northern women. They look so strong, but they are easily
battered. The face falls so early under those wide cheek-bones. A single
idea--hate or greed, or even love--can tear them to shreds. She is
nineteen ? Well, in ten years she may have quite a regal beauty, or she
may have a heavy, discontented face, all dug out in channels. That will
depend upon the kind of ideas she lives with.”

“Or the kind of people ?” Ottenburg suggested.

The old Jewess folded her arms over her massive chest, drew back her
shoulders, and looked up at the young man. “With that hard glint in her
eye ? The people won't matter much, I fancy. They will come and go. She
is very much interested in herself--as she should be.”

Ottenburg frowned. “Wait until you hear her sing. Her eyes are different
then. That gleam that comes in them is curious, isn't it ? As you say,
it's impersonal.”

The object of this discussion came in, smiling. She had chosen neither
the blue nor the yellow gown, but a pale rose-color, with silver
butterflies. Mrs. Nathanmeyer lifted her lorgnette and studied her as
she approached. She caught the characteristic things at once: the free,
strong walk, the calm carriage of the head, the milky whiteness of the
girl's arms and shoulders.

“Yes, that color is good for you,” she said approvingly. “The yellow one
probably killed your hair ? Yes; this does very well indeed, so we need
think no more about it.”

Thea glanced questioningly at Ottenburg. He smiled and bowed, seemed
perfectly satisfied. He asked her to stand in the elbow of the piano, in
front of him, instead of behind him as she had been taught to do.

“Yes,” said the hostess with feeling. “That other position is
barbarous.”

Thea sang an aria from 'Gioconda,' some songs by Schumann which she had
studied with Harsanyi, and the “TAK FOR DIT ROD,” which Ottenburg liked.

“That you must do again,” he declared when they finished this song. “You
did it much better the other day. You accented it more, like a dance or
a galop. How did you do it ?”

Thea laughed, glancing sidewise at Mrs. Nathanmeyer. “You want it
rough-house, do you ? Bowers likes me to sing it more seriously, but it
always makes me think about a story my grandmother used to tell.”

Fred pointed to the chair behind her. “Won't you rest a moment and tell
us about it ? I thought you had some notion about it when you first sang
it for me.”

Thea sat down. “In Norway my grandmother knew a girl who was awfully in
love with a young fellow. She went into service on a big dairy farm to
make enough money for her outfit. They were married at Christmastime,
and everybody was glad, because they'd been sighing around about each
other for so long. That very summer, the day before St. John's Day, her
husband caught her carrying on with another farm-hand. The next night
all the farm people had a bonfire and a big dance up on the mountain,
and everybody was dancing and singing. I guess they were all a little
drunk, for they got to seeing how near they could make the girls dance
to the edge of the cliff. Ole--he was the girl's husband--seemed the
jolliest and the drunkest of anybody. He danced his wife nearer and
nearer the edge of the rock, and his wife began to scream so that the
others stopped dancing and the music stopped; but Ole went right on
singing, and he danced her over the edge of the cliff and they fell
hundreds of feet and were all smashed to pieces.”

Ottenburg turned back to the piano. “That's the idea! Now, come Miss
Thea. Let it go!”

Thea took her place. She laughed and drew herself up out of her corsets,
threw her shoulders high and let them drop again. She had never sung in
a low dress before, and she found it comfortable. Ottenburg jerked his
head and they began the song. The accompaniment sounded more than ever
like the thumping and scraping of heavy feet.

When they stopped, they heard a sympathetic tapping at the end of the
room. Old Mr. Nathanmeyer had come to the door and was sitting back in
the shadow, just inside the library, applauding with his cane. Thea
threw him a bright smile. He continued to sit there, his slippered foot
on a low chair, his cane between his fingers, and she glanced at him
from time to time. The doorway made a frame for him, and he looked like
a man in a picture, with the long, shadowy room behind him.

Mrs. Nathanmeyer summoned the maid again. “Selma will pack that gown in
a box for you, and you can take it home in Mr. Ottenburg's carriage.”

Thea turned to follow the maid, but hesitated. “Shall I wear gloves ?”
 she asked, turning again to Mrs. Nathanmeyer.

“No, I think not. Your arms are good, and you will feel freer without.
You will need light slippers, pink--or white, if you have them, will do
quite as well.”

Thea went upstairs with the maid and Mrs. Nathanmeyer rose, took
Ottenburg's arm, and walked toward her husband. “That's the first real
voice I have heard in Chicago,” she said decidedly. “I don't count that
stupid Priest woman. What do you say, father ?”

Mr. Nathanmeyer shook his white head and smiled softly, as if he were
thinking about something very agreeable. “SVENSK SOMMAR,” he murmured.
“She is like a Swedish summer. I spent nearly a year there when I was a
young man,” he explained to Ottenburg.

When Ottenburg got Thea and her big box into the carriage, it occurred
to him that she must be hungry, after singing so much. When he asked
her, she admitted that she was very hungry, indeed.

He took out his watch. “Would you mind stopping somewhere with me ? It's
only eleven.”

“Mind ? Of course, I wouldn't mind. I wasn't brought up like that. I can
take care of myself.”

Ottenburg laughed. “And I can take care of myself, so we can do lots of
jolly things together.” He opened the carriage door and spoke to the
driver. “I'm stuck on the way you sing that Grieg song,” he declared.

When Thea got into bed that night she told herself that this was the
happiest evening she had had in Chicago. She had enjoyed the
Nathanmeyers and their grand house, her new dress, and Ottenburg, her
first real carriage ride, and the good supper when she was so hungry.
And Ottenburg WAS jolly! He made you want to come back at him. You
weren't always being caught up and mystified. When you started in with
him, you went; you cut the breeze, as Ray used to say. He had some go in
him.


Philip Frederick Ottenburg was the third son of the great brewer. His
mother was Katarina Furst, the daughter and heiress of a brewing
business older and richer than Otto Ottenburg's. As a young woman she
had been a conspicuous figure in German-American society in New York,
and not untouched by scandal. She was a handsome, headstrong girl, a
rebellious and violent force in a provincial society. She was brutally
sentimental and heavily romantic. Her free speech, her Continental
ideas, and her proclivity for championing new causes, even when she did
not know much about them, made her an object of suspicion. She was
always going abroad to seek out intellectual affinities, and was one of
the group of young women who followed Wagner about in his old age,
keeping at a respectful distance, but receiving now and then a gracious
acknowledgment that he appreciated their homage. When the composer died,
Katarina, then a matron with a family, took to her bed and saw no one
for a week.

After having been engaged to an American actor, a Welsh socialist
agitator, and a German army officer, Fraulein Furst at last placed
herself and her great brewery interests into the trustworthy hands of
Otto Ottenburg, who had been her suitor ever since he was a clerk,
learning his business in her father's office.

Her first two sons were exactly like their father. Even as children they
were industrious, earnest little tradesmen. As Frau Ottenburg said, “she
had to wait for her Fred, but she got him at last,” the first man who
had altogether pleased her. Frederick entered Harvard when he was
eighteen. When his mother went to Boston to visit him, she not only got
him everything he wished for, but she made handsome and often
embarrassing presents to all his friends. She gave dinners and supper
parties for the Glee Club, made the crew break training, and was a
generally disturbing influence. In his third year Fred left the
university because of a serious escapade which had somewhat hampered his
life ever since. He went at once into his father's business, where, in
his own way, he had made himself very useful.

Fred Ottenburg was now twenty-eight, and people could only say of him
that he had been less hurt by his mother's indulgence than most boys
would have been. He had never wanted anything that he could not have it,
and he might have had a great many things that he had never wanted. He
was extravagant, but not prodigal. He turned most of the money his
mother gave him into the business, and lived on his generous salary.

Fred had never been bored for a whole day in his life. When he was in
Chicago or St. Louis, he went to ballgames, prize-fights, and
horse-races. When he was in Germany, he went to concerts and to the
opera. He belonged to a long list of sporting-clubs and hunting-clubs,
and was a good boxer. He had so many natural interests that he had no
affectations. At Harvard he kept away from the aesthetic circle that had
already discovered Francis Thompson. He liked no poetry but German
poetry. Physical energy was the thing he was full to the brim of, and
music was one of its natural forms of expression. He had a healthy love
of sport and art, of eating and drinking. When he was in Germany, he
scarcely knew where the soup ended and the symphony began.




V

MARCH began badly for Thea. She had a cold during the first week, and
after she got through her church duties on Sunday she had to go to bed
with tonsilitis. She was still in the boarding-house at which young
Ottenburg had called when he took her to see Mrs. Nathanmeyer. She had
stayed on there because her room, although it was inconvenient and very
small, was at the corner of the house and got the sunlight.

Since she left Mrs. Lorch, this was the first place where she had got
away from a north light. Her rooms had all been as damp and mouldy as
they were dark, with deep foundations of dirt under the carpets, and
dirty walls. In her present room there was no running water and no
clothes closet, and she had to have the dresser moved out to make room
for her piano. But there were two windows, one on the south and one on
the west, a light wall-paper with morning-glory vines, and on the floor
a clean matting. The landlady had tried to make the room look cheerful,
because it was hard to let. It was so small that Thea could keep it
clean herself, after the Hun had done her worst. She hung her dresses on
the door under a sheet, used the washstand for a dresser, slept on a
cot, and opened both the windows when she practiced. She felt less
walled in than she had in the other houses.

Wednesday was her third day in bed. The medical student who lived in the
house had been in to see her, had left some tablets and a foamy gargle,
and told her that she could probably go back to work on Monday. The
landlady stuck her head in once a day, but Thea did not encourage her
visits. The Hungarian chambermaid brought her soup and toast. She made a
sloppy pretense of putting the room in order, but she was such a dirty
creature that Thea would not let her touch her cot; she got up every
morning and turned the mattress and made the bed herself. The exertion
made her feel miserably ill, but at least she could lie still
contentedly for a long while afterward. She hated the poisoned feeling
in her throat, and no matter how often she gargled she felt unclean and
disgusting. Still, if she had to be ill, she was almost glad that she
had a contagious illness. Otherwise she would have been at the mercy of
the people in the house. She knew that they disliked her, yet now that
she was ill, they took it upon themselves to tap at her door, send her
messages, books, even a miserable flower or two. Thea knew that their
sympathy was an expression of self-righteousness, and she hated them for
it. The divinity student, who was always whispering soft things to her,
sent her “The Kreutzer Sonata.”

The medical student had been kind to her: he knew that she did not want
to pay a doctor. His gargle had helped her, and he gave her things to
make her sleep at night. But he had been a cheat, too. He had exceeded
his rights. She had no soreness in her chest, and had told him so
clearly. All this thumping of her back, and listening to her breathing,
was done to satisfy personal curiosity. She had watched him with a
contemptuous smile. She was too sick to care; if it amused him--She made
him wash his hands before he touched her; he was never very clean. All
the same, it wounded her and made her feel that the world was a pretty
disgusting place. “The Kreutzer Sonata” did not make her feel any more
cheerful. She threw it aside with hatred. She could not believe it was
written by the same man who wrote the novel that had thrilled her.

Her cot was beside the south window, and on Wednesday afternoon she lay
thinking about the Harsanyis, about old Mr. Nathanmeyer, and about how
she was missing Fred Ottenburg's visits to the studio. That was much the
worst thing about being sick. If she were going to the studio every day,
she might be having pleasant encounters with Fred. He was always running
away, Bowers said, and he might be planning to go away as soon as Mrs.
Nathanmeyer's evenings were over. And here she was losing all this time!

After a while she heard the Hun's clumsy trot in the hall, and then a
pound on the door. Mary came in, making her usual uncouth sounds,
carrying a long box and a big basket. Thea sat up in bed and tore off
the strings and paper. The basket was full of fruit, with a big Hawaiian
pineapple in the middle, and in the box there were layers of pink roses
with long, woody stems and dark-green leaves. They filled the room with
a cool smell that made another air to breathe. Mary stood with her apron
full of paper and cardboard. When she saw Thea take an envelope out from
under the flowers, she uttered an exclamation, pointed to the roses, and
then to the bosom of her own dress, on the left side. Thea laughed and
nodded. She understood that Mary associated the color with Ottenburg's
BOUTONNIERE. She pointed to the water pitcher,--she had nothing else big
enough to hold the flowers,--and made Mary put it on the window sill
beside her.

After Mary was gone Thea locked the door. When the landlady knocked, she
pretended that she was asleep. She lay still all afternoon and with
drowsy eyes watched the roses open. They were the first hothouse flowers
she had ever had. The cool fragrance they released was soothing, and as
the pink petals curled back, they were the only things between her and
the gray sky. She lay on her side, putting the room and the
boarding-house behind her. Fred knew where all the pleasant things in
the world were, she reflected, and knew the road to them. He had keys to
all the nice places in his pocket, and seemed to jingle them from time
to time. And then, he was young; and her friends had always been old.
Her mind went back over them. They had all been teachers; wonderfully
kind, but still teachers. Ray Kennedy, she knew, had wanted to marry
her, but he was the most protecting and teacher-like of them all. She
moved impatiently in her cot and threw her braids away from her hot
neck, over her pillow. “I don't want him for a teacher,” she thought,
frowning petulantly out of the window. “I've had such a string of them.
I want him for a sweetheart.”




VI

“THEA,” said Fred Ottenburg one drizzly afternoon in April, while they
sat waiting for their tea at a restaurant in the Pullman Building,
overlooking the lake, “what are you going to do this summer ?”

“I don't know. Work, I suppose.”

“With Bowers, you mean ? Even Bowers goes fishing for a month. Chicago's
no place to work, in the summer. Haven't you made any plans ?”

Thea shrugged her shoulders. “No use having any plans when you haven't
any money. They are unbecoming.”

“Aren't you going home ?”

She shook her head. “No. It won't be comfortable there till I've got
something to show for myself. I'm not getting on at all, you know. This
year has been mostly wasted.”

“You're stale; that's what's the matter with you. And just now you're
dead tired. You'll talk more rationally after you've had some tea. Rest
your throat until it comes.” They were sitting by a window. As Ottenburg
looked at her in the gray light, he remembered what Mrs. Nathanmeyer had
said about the Swedish face “breaking early.” Thea was as gray as the
weather. Her skin looked sick. Her hair, too, though on a damp day it
curled charmingly about her face, looked pale.

Fred beckoned the waiter and increased his order for food. Thea did not
hear him. She was staring out of the window, down at the roof of the Art
Institute and the green lions, dripping in the rain. The lake was all
rolling mist, with a soft shimmer of robin's-egg blue in the gray. A
lumber boat, with two very tall masts, was emerging gaunt and black out
of the fog. When the tea came Thea ate hungrily, and Fred watched her.
He thought her eyes became a little less bleak. The kettle sang
cheerfully over the spirit lamp, and she seemed to concentrate her
attention upon that pleasant sound. She kept looking toward it
listlessly and indulgently, in a way that gave him a realization of her
loneliness. Fred lit a cigarette and smoked thoughtfully. He and Thea
were alone in the quiet, dusky room full of white tables. In those days
Chicago people never stopped for tea. “Come,” he said at last, “what
would you do this summer, if you could do whatever you wished ?”

“I'd go a long way from here! West, I think. Maybe I could get some of
my spring back. All this cold, cloudy weather,”--she looked out at the
lake and shivered,--“I don't know, it does things to me,” she ended
abruptly.

Fred nodded. “I know. You've been going down ever since you had
tonsilitis. I've seen it. What you need is to sit in the sun and bake
for three months. You've got the right idea. I remember once when we
were having dinner somewhere you kept asking me about the Cliff-Dweller
ruins. Do they still interest you ?”

“Of course they do. I've always wanted to go down there--long before I
ever got in for this.”

“I don't think I told you, but my father owns a whole canyon full of
Cliff-Dweller ruins. He has a big worthless ranch down in Arizona, near
a Navajo reservation, and there's a canyon on the place they call
Panther Canyon, chock full of that sort of thing. I often go down there
to hunt. Henry Biltmer and his wife live there and keep a tidy place.
He's an old German who worked in the brewery until he lost his health.
Now he runs a few cattle. Henry likes to do me a favor. I've done a few
for him.” Fred drowned his cigarette in his saucer and studied Thea's
expression, which was wistful and intent, envious and admiring. He
continued with satisfaction: “If you went down there and stayed with
them for two or three months, they wouldn't let you pay anything. I
might send Henry a new gun, but even I couldn't offer him money for
putting up a friend of mine. I'll get you transportation. It would make
a new girl of you. Let me write to Henry, and you pack your trunk.
That's all that's necessary. No red tape about it. What do you say,
Thea ?”

She bit her lip, and sighed as if she were waking up.

Fred crumpled his napkin impatiently. “Well, isn't it easy enough ?”

“That's the trouble; it's TOO easy. Doesn't sound probable. I'm not used
to getting things for nothing.”

Ottenburg laughed. “Oh, if that's all, I'll show you how to begin. You
won't get this for nothing, quite. I'll ask you to let me stop off and
see you on my way to California. Perhaps by that time you will be glad
to see me. Better let me break the news to Bowers. I can manage him. He
needs a little transportation himself now and then. You must get
corduroy riding-things and leather leggings. There are a few snakes
about. Why do you keep frowning ?”

“Well, I don't exactly see why you take the trouble. What do you get out
of it ? You haven't liked me so well the last two or three weeks.”

Fred dropped his third cigarette and looked at his watch. “If you don't
see that, it's because you need a tonic. I'll show you what I'll get out
of it. Now I'm going to get a cab and take you home. You are too tired
to walk a step. You'd better get to bed as soon as you get there. Of
course, I don't like you so well when you're half anaesthetized all the
time. What have you been doing to yourself ?”

Thea rose. “I don't know. Being bored eats the heart out of me, I
guess.” She walked meekly in front of him to the elevator. Fred noticed
for the hundredth time how vehemently her body proclaimed her state of
feeling. He remembered how remarkably brilliant and beautiful she had
been when she sang at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's: flushed and gleaming, round
and supple, something that couldn't be dimmed or downed. And now she
seemed a moving figure of discouragement. The very waiters glanced at
her apprehensively. It was not that she made a fuss, but her back was
most extraordinarily vocal. One never needed to see her face to know
what she was full of that day. Yet she was certainly not mercurial. Her
flesh seemed to take a mood and to “set,” like plaster. As he put her
into the cab, Fred reflected once more that he “gave her up.” He would
attack her when his lance was brighter.





PART IV. THE ANCIENT PEOPLE




I

THE San Francisco Mountain lies in Northern Arizona, above Flagstaff,
and its blue slopes and snowy summit entice the eye for a hundred miles
across the desert. About its base lie the pine forests of the Navajos,
where the great red-trunked trees live out their peaceful centuries in
that sparkling air. The PINONS and scrub begin only where the forest
ends, where the country breaks into open, stony clearings and the
surface of the earth cracks into deep canyons. The great pines stand at
a considerable distance from each other. Each tree grows alone, murmurs
alone, thinks alone. They do not intrude upon each other. The Navajos
are not much in the habit of giving or of asking help. Their language is
not a communicative one, and they never attempt an interchange of
personality in speech. Over their forests there is the same inexorable
reserve. Each tree has its exalted power to bear.

That was the first thing Thea Kronborg felt about the forest, as she
drove through it one May morning in Henry Biltmer's democrat wagon--and
it was the first great forest she had ever seen. She had got off the
train at Flagstaff that morning, rolled off into the high, chill air
when all the pines on the mountain were fired by sunrise, so that she
seemed to fall from sleep directly into the forest.

Old Biltmer followed a faint wagon trail which ran southeast, and which,
as they traveled, continually dipped lower, falling away from the high
plateau on the slope of which Flagstaff sits. The white peak of the
mountain, the snow gorges above the timber, now disappeared from time to
time as the road dropped and dropped, and the forest closed behind the
wagon. More than the mountain disappeared as the forest closed thus.
Thea seemed to be taking very little through the wood with her. The
personality of which she was so tired seemed to let go of her. The high,
sparkling air drank it up like blotting-paper. It was lost in the
thrilling blue of the new sky and the song of the thin wind in the
PINONS. The old, fretted lines which marked one off, which defined
her,--made her Thea Kronborg, Bowers's accompanist, a soprano with a
faulty middle voice,--were all erased.

So far she had failed. Her two years in Chicago had not resulted in
anything. She had failed with Harsanyi, and she had made no great
progress with her voice. She had come to believe that whatever Bowers
had taught her was of secondary importance, and that in the essential
things she had made no advance. Her student life closed behind her, like
the forest, and she doubted whether she could go back to it if she
tried. Probably she would teach music in little country towns all her
life. Failure was not so tragic as she would have supposed; she was
tired enough not to care.

She was getting back to the earliest sources of gladness that she could
remember. She had loved the sun, and the brilliant solitudes of sand and
sun, long before these other things had come along to fasten themselves
upon her and torment her. That night, when she clambered into her big
German feather bed, she felt completely released from the enslaving
desire to get on in the world. Darkness had once again the sweet wonder
that it had in childhood.




II

THEA'S life at the Ottenburg ranch was simple and full of light, like
the days themselves. She awoke every morning when the first fierce
shafts of sunlight darted through the curtainless windows of her room at
the ranch house. After breakfast she took her lunch-basket and went down
to the canyon. Usually she did not return until sunset.

Panther Canyon was like a thousand others--one of those abrupt fissures
with which the earth in the Southwest is riddled; so abrupt that you
might walk over the edge of any one of them on a dark night and never
know what had happened to you. This canyon headed on the Ottenburg
ranch, about a mile from the ranch house, and it was accessible only at
its head. The canyon walls, for the first two hundred feet below the
surface, were perpendicular cliffs, striped with even-running strata of
rock. From there on to the bottom the sides were less abrupt, were
shelving, and lightly fringed with PINONS and dwarf cedars. The effect
was that of a gentler canyon within a wilder one. The dead city lay at
the point where the perpendicular outer wall ceased and the V-shaped
inner gorge began. There a stratum of rock, softer than those above, had
been hollowed out by the action of time until it was like a deep groove
running along the sides of the canyon. In this hollow (like a great fold
in the rock) the Ancient People had built their houses of yellowish
stone and mortar. The over-hanging cliff above made a roof two hundred
feet thick. The hard stratum below was an everlasting floor. The houses
stood along in a row, like the buildings in a city block, or like a
barracks.

In both walls of the canyon the same streak of soft rock had been washed
out, and the long horizontal groove had been built up with houses. The
dead city had thus two streets, one set in either cliff, facing each
other across the ravine, with a river of blue air between them.

The canyon twisted and wound like a snake, and these two streets went on
for four miles or more, interrupted by the abrupt turnings of the gorge,
but beginning again within each turn. The canyon had a dozen of these
false endings near its head. Beyond, the windings were larger and less
perceptible, and it went on for a hundred miles, too narrow,
precipitous, and terrible for man to follow it. The Cliff Dwellers liked
wide canyons, where the great cliffs caught the sun. Panther Canyon had
been deserted for hundreds of years when the first Spanish missionaries
came into Arizona, but the masonry of the houses was still wonderfully
firm; had crumbled only where a landslide or a rolling boulder had torn
it.

All the houses in the canyon were clean with the cleanness of sun-baked,
wind-swept places, and they all smelled of the tough little cedars that
twisted themselves into the very doorways. One of these rock-rooms Thea
took for her own. Fred had told her how to make it comfortable. The day
after she came old Henry brought over on one of the pack-ponies a roll
of Navajo blankets that belonged to Fred, and Thea lined her cave with
them. The room was not more than eight by ten feet, and she could touch
the stone roof with her finger-tips. This was her old idea: a nest in a
high cliff, full of sun. All morning long the sun beat upon her cliff,
while the ruins on the opposite side of the canyon were in shadow. In
the afternoon, when she had the shade of two hundred feet of rock wall,
the ruins on the other side of the gulf stood out in the blazing
sunlight. Before her door ran the narrow, winding path that had been the
street of the Ancient People. The yucca and niggerhead cactus grew
everywhere. From her doorstep she looked out on the ocher-colored slope
that ran down several hundred feet to the stream, and this hot rock was
sparsely grown with dwarf trees. Their colors were so pale that the
shadows of the little trees on the rock stood out sharper than the trees
themselves. When Thea first came, the chokecherry bushes were in
blossom, and the scent of them was almost sickeningly sweet after a
shower. At the very bottom of the canyon, along the stream, there was a
thread of bright, flickering, golden-green,--cottonwood seedlings. They
made a living, chattering screen behind which she took her bath every
morning.

Thea went down to the stream by the Indian water trail. She had found a
bathing-pool with a sand bottom, where the creek was damned by fallen
trees. The climb back was long and steep, and when she reached her
little house in the cliff she always felt fresh delight in its comfort
and inaccessibility. By the time she got there, the woolly red-and-gray
blankets were saturated with sunlight, and she sometimes fell asleep as
soon as she stretched her body on their warm surfaces. She used to
wonder at her own inactivity. She could lie there hour after hour in the
sun and listen to the strident whir of the big locusts, and to the
light, ironical laughter of the quaking asps. All her life she had been
hurrying and sputtering, as if she had been born behind time and had
been trying to catch up. Now, she reflected, as she drew herself out
long upon the rugs, it was as if she were waiting for something to catch
up with her. She had got to a place where she was out of the stream of
meaningless activity and undirected effort.

Here she could lie for half a day undistracted, holding pleasant and
incomplete conceptions in her mind--almost in her hands. They were
scarcely clear enough to be called ideas. They had something to do with
fragrance and color and sound, but almost nothing to do with words. She
was singing very little now, but a song would go through her head all
morning, as a spring keeps welling up, and it was like a pleasant
sensation indefinitely prolonged. It was much more like a sensation than
like an idea, or an act of remembering. Music had never come to her in
that sensuous form before. It had always been a thing to be struggled
with, had always brought anxiety and exaltation and chagrin--never
content and indolence. Thea began to wonder whether people could not
utterly lose the power to work, as they can lose their voice or their
memory. She had always been a little drudge, hurrying from one task to
another--as if it mattered! And now her power to think seemed converted
into a power of sustained sensation. She could become a mere receptacle
for heat, or become a color, like the bright lizards that darted about
on the hot stones outside her door; or she could become a continuous
repetition of sound, like the cicadas.




III

THE faculty of observation was never highly developed in Thea Kronborg.
A great deal escaped her eye as she passed through the world. But the
things which were for her, she saw; she experienced them physically and
remembered them as if they had once been a part of herself. The roses
she used to see in the florists' shops in Chicago were merely roses. But
when she thought of the moonflowers that grew over Mrs. Tellamantez's
door, it was as if she had been that vine and had opened up in white
flowers every night. There were memories of light on the sand hills, of
masses of prickly-pear blossoms she had found in the desert in early
childhood, of the late afternoon sun pouring through the grape leaves
and the mint bed in Mrs. Kohler's garden, which she would never lose.
These recollections were a part of her mind and personality. In Chicago
she had got almost nothing that went into her subconscious self and took
root there. But here, in Panther Canyon, there were again things which
seemed destined for her.

Panther Canyon was the home of innumerable swallows. They built nests in
the wall far above the hollow groove in which Thea's own rock chamber
lay. They seldom ventured above the rim of the canyon, to the flat,
wind-swept tableland. Their world was the blue air-river between the
canyon walls. In that blue gulf the arrow-shaped birds swam all day
long, with only an occasional movement of the wings. The only sad thing
about them was their timidity; the way in which they lived their lives
between the echoing cliffs and never dared to rise out of the shadow of
the canyon walls. As they swam past her door, Thea often felt how easy
it would be to dream one's life out in some cleft in the world.

From the ancient dwelling there came always a dignified, unobtrusive
sadness; now stronger, now fainter,--like the aromatic smell which the
dwarf cedars gave out in the sun,--but always present, a part of the air
one breathed. At night, when Thea dreamed about the canyon,--or in the
early morning when she hurried toward it, anticipating it,--her
conception of it was of yellow rocks baking in sunlight, the swallows,
the cedar smell, and that peculiar sadness--a voice out of the past, not
very loud, that went on saying a few simple things to the solitude
eternally.

Standing up in her lodge, Thea could with her thumb nail dislodge flakes
of carbon from the rock roof--the cooking-smoke of the Ancient People.
They were that near! A timid, nest-building folk, like the swallows. How
often Thea remembered Ray Kennedy's moralizing about the cliff cities.
He used to say that he never felt the hardness of the human struggle or
the sadness of history as he felt it among those ruins. He used to say,
too, that it made one feel an obligation to do one's best. On the first
day that Thea climbed the water trail she began to have intuitions about
the women who had worn the path, and who had spent so great a part of
their lives going up and down it. She found herself trying to walk as
they must have walked, with a feeling in her feet and knees and loins
which she had never known before,--which must have come up to her out of
the accustomed dust of that rocky trail. She could feel the weight of an
Indian baby hanging to her back as she climbed.

The empty houses, among which she wandered in the afternoon, the
blanketed one in which she lay all morning, were haunted by certain
fears and desires; feelings about warmth and cold and water and physical
strength. It seemed to Thea that a certain understanding of those old
people came up to her out of the rock shelf on which she lay; that
certain feelings were transmitted to her, suggestions that were simple,
insistent, and monotonous, like the beating of Indian drums. They were
not expressible in words, but seemed rather to translate themselves into
attitudes of body, into degrees of muscular tension or relaxation; the
naked strength of youth, sharp as the sunshafts; the crouching
timorousness of age, the sullenness of women who waited for their
captors. At the first turning of the canyon there was a half-ruined
tower of yellow masonry, a watch-tower upon which the young men used to
entice eagles and snare them with nets. Sometimes for a whole morning
Thea could see the coppery breast and shoulders of an Indian youth there
against the sky; see him throw the net, and watch the struggle with the
eagle.

Old Henry Biltmer, at the ranch, had been a great deal among the Pueblo
Indians who are the descendants of the Cliff-Dwellers. After supper he
used to sit and smoke his pipe by the kitchen stove and talk to Thea
about them. He had never found any one before who was interested in his
ruins. Every Sunday the old man prowled about in the canyon, and he had
come to know a good deal more about it than he could account for. He had
gathered up a whole chestful of Cliff-Dweller relics which he meant to
take back to Germany with him some day. He taught Thea how to find
things among the ruins: grinding-stones, and drills and needles made of
turkey-bones. There were fragments of pottery everywhere. Old Henry
explained to her that the Ancient People had developed masonry and
pottery far beyond any other crafts. After they had made houses for
themselves, the next thing was to house the precious water. He explained
to her how all their customs and ceremonies and their religion went back
to water. The men provided the food, but water was the care of the
women. The stupid women carried water for most of their lives; the
cleverer ones made the vessels to hold it. Their pottery was their most
direct appeal to water, the envelope and sheath of the precious element
itself. The strongest Indian need was expressed in those graceful jars,
fashioned slowly by hand, without the aid of a wheel.

When Thea took her bath at the bottom of the canyon, in the sunny pool
behind the screen of cottonwoods, she sometimes felt as if the water
must have sovereign qualities, from having been the object of so much
service and desire. That stream was the only living thing left of the
drama that had been played out in the canyon centuries ago. In the
rapid, restless heart of it, flowing swifter than the rest, there was a
continuity of life that reached back into the old time. The glittering
thread of current had a kind of lightly worn, loosely knit personality,
graceful and laughing. Thea's bath came to have a ceremonial gravity.
The atmosphere of the canyon was ritualistic.

One morning, as she was standing upright in the pool, splashing water
between her shoulder-blades with a big sponge, something flashed through
her mind that made her draw herself up and stand still until the water
had quite dried upon her flushed skin. The stream and the broken
pottery: what was any art but an effort to make a sheath, a mould in
which to imprison for a moment the shining, elusive element which is
life itself,--life hurrying past us and running away, too strong to
stop, too sweet to lose ? The Indian women had held it in their jars. In
the sculpture she had seen in the Art Institute, it had been caught in a
flash of arrested motion. In singing, one made a vessel of one's throat
and nostrils and held it on one's breath, caught the stream in a scale
of natural intervals.




IV

THEA had a superstitious feeling about the potsherds, and liked better
to leave them in the dwellings where she found them. If she took a few
bits back to her own lodge and hid them under the blankets, she did it
guiltily, as if she were being watched. She was a guest in these houses,
and ought to behave as such. Nearly every afternoon she went to the
chambers which contained the most interesting fragments of pottery, sat
and looked at them for a while. Some of them were beautifully decorated.
This care, expended upon vessels that could not hold food or water any
better for the additional labor put upon them, made her heart go out to
those ancient potters. They had not only expressed their desire, but
they had expressed it as beautifully as they could. Food, fire, water,
and something else--even here, in this crack in the world, so far back
in the night of the past! Down here at the beginning that painful thing
was already stirring; the seed of sorrow, and of so much delight.

There were jars done in a delicate overlay, like pine cones; and there
were many patterns in a low relief, like basket-work. Some of the
pottery was decorated in color, red and brown, black and white, in
graceful geometrical patterns. One day, on a fragment of a shallow bowl,
she found a crested serpent's head, painted in red on terra-cotta. Again
she found half a bowl with a broad band of white cliff-houses painted on
a black ground. They were scarcely conventionalized at all; there they
were in the black border, just as they stood in the rock before her. It
brought her centuries nearer to these people to find that they saw their
houses exactly as she saw them.

Yes, Ray Kennedy was right. All these things made one feel that one
ought to do one's best, and help to fulfill some desire of the dust that
slept there. A dream had been dreamed there long ago, in the night of
ages, and the wind had whispered some promise to the sadness of the
savage. In their own way, those people had felt the beginnings of what
was to come. These potsherds were like fetters that bound one to a long
chain of human endeavor.

Not only did the world seem older and richer to Thea now, but she
herself seemed older. She had never been alone for so long before, or
thought so much. Nothing had ever engrossed her so deeply as the daily
contemplation of that line of pale-yellow houses tucked into the wrinkle
of the cliff. Moonstone and Chicago had become vague. Here everything
was simple and definite, as things had been in childhood. Her mind was
like a ragbag into which she had been frantically thrusting whatever she
could grab. And here she must throw this lumber away. The things that
were really hers separated themselves from the rest. Her ideas were
simplified, became sharper and clearer. She felt united and strong.


When Thea had been at the Ottenburg ranch for two months, she got a
letter from Fred announcing that he “might be along at almost any time
now.” The letter came at night, and the next morning she took it down
into the canyon with her. She was delighted that he was coming soon. She
had never felt so grateful to any one, and she wanted to tell him
everything that had happened to her since she had been there--more than
had happened in all her life before. Certainly she liked Fred better
than any one else in the world. There was Harsanyi, of course--but
Harsanyi was always tired. Just now, and here, she wanted some one who
had never been tired, who could catch an idea and run with it.

She was ashamed to think what an apprehensive drudge she must always
have seemed to Fred, and she wondered why he had concerned himself about
her at all. Perhaps she would never be so happy or so good-looking
again, and she would like Fred to see her, for once, at her best. She
had not been singing much, but she knew that her voice was more
interesting than it had ever been before. She had begun to understand
that--with her, at least--voice was, first of all, vitality; a lightness
in the body and a driving power in the blood. If she had that, she could
sing. When she felt so keenly alive, lying on that insensible shelf of
stone, when her body bounded like a rubber ball away from its hardness,
then she could sing. This, too, she could explain to Fred. He would know
what she meant.

Another week passed. Thea did the same things as before, felt the same
influences, went over the same ideas; but there was a livelier movement
in her thoughts, and a freshening of sensation, like the brightness
which came over the underbrush after a shower. A persistent
affirmation--or denial--was going on in her, like the tapping of the
woodpecker in the one tall pine tree across the chasm. Musical phrases
drove each other rapidly through her mind, and the song of the cicada
was now too long and too sharp. Everything seemed suddenly to take the
form of a desire for action.

It was while she was in this abstracted state, waiting for the clock to
strike, that Thea at last made up her mind what she was going to try to
do in the world, and that she was going to Germany to study without
further loss of time. Only by the merest chance had she ever got to
Panther Canyon. There was certainly no kindly Providence that directed
one's life; and one's parents did not in the least care what became of
one, so long as one did not misbehave and endanger their comfort. One's
life was at the mercy of blind chance. She had better take it in her own
hands and lose everything than meekly draw the plough under the rod of
parental guidance. She had seen it when she was at home last
summer,--the hostility of comfortable, self-satisfied people toward any
serious effort. Even to her father it seemed indecorous. Whenever she
spoke seriously, he looked apologetic. Yet she had clung fast to
whatever was left of Moonstone in her mind. No more of that! The
Cliff-Dwellers had lengthened her past. She had older and higher
obligations.




V

ONE Sunday afternoon late in July old Henry Biltmer was rheumatically
descending into the head of the canyon. The Sunday before had been one
of those cloudy days--fortunately rare--when the life goes out of that
country and it becomes a gray ghost, an empty, shivering uncertainty.
Henry had spent the day in the barn; his canyon was a reality only when
it was flooded with the light of its great lamp, when the yellow rocks
cast purple shadows, and the resin was fairly cooking in the corkscrew
cedars. The yuccas were in blossom now. Out of each clump of sharp
bayonet leaves rose a tall stalk hung with greenish-white bells with
thick, fleshy petals. The niggerhead cactus was thrusting its crimson
blooms up out of every crevice in the rocks.

Henry had come out on the pretext of hunting a spade and pick-axe that
young Ottenburg had borrowed, but he was keeping his eyes open. He was
really very curious about the new occupants of the canyon, and what they
found to do there all day long. He let his eye travel along the gulf for
a mile or so to the first turning, where the fissure zigzagged out and
then receded behind a stone promontory on which stood the yellowish,
crumbling ruin of the old watch-tower.

From the base of this tower, which now threw its shadow forward, bits of
rock kept flying out into the open gulf--skating upon the air until they
lost their momentum, then falling like chips until they rang upon the
ledges at the bottom of the gorge or splashed into the stream. Biltmer
shaded his eyes with his hand. There on the promontory, against the
cream-colored cliff, were two figures nimbly moving in the light, both
slender and agile, entirely absorbed in their game. They looked like two
boys. Both were hatless and both wore white shirts.

Henry forgot his pick-axe and followed the trail before the cliff-houses
toward the tower. Behind the tower, as he well knew, were heaps of
stones, large and small, piled against the face of the cliff. He had
always believed that the Indian watchmen piled them there for
ammunition. Thea and Fred had come upon these missiles and were throwing
them for distance. As Biltmer approached he could hear them laughing,
and he caught Thea's voice, high and excited, with a ring of vexation in
it. Fred was teaching her to throw a heavy stone like a discus. When it
was Fred's turn, he sent a triangular-shaped stone out into the air with
considerable skill. Thea watched it enviously, standing in a
half-defiant posture, her sleeves rolled above her elbows and her face
flushed with heat and excitement. After Fred's third missile had rung
upon the rocks below, she snatched up a stone and stepped impatiently
out on the ledge in front of him. He caught her by the elbows and pulled
her back.

“Not so close, you silly! You'll spin yourself off in a minute.”

“You went that close. There's your heel-mark,” she retorted.

“Well, I know how. That makes a difference.” He drew a mark in the dust
with his toe. “There, that's right. Don't step over that. Pivot yourself
on your spine, and make a half turn. When you've swung your length, let
it go.”

Thea settled the flat piece of rock between her wrist and fingers, faced
the cliff wall, stretched her arm in position, whirled round on her left
foot to the full stretch of her body, and let the missile spin out over
the gulf. She hung expectantly in the air, forgetting to draw back her
arm, her eyes following the stone as if it carried her fortunes with it.
Her comrade watched her; there weren't many girls who could show a line
like that from the toe to the thigh, from the shoulder to the tip of the
outstretched hand. The stone spent itself and began to fall. Thea drew
back and struck her knee furiously with her palm.

“There it goes again! Not nearly so far as yours. What IS the matter
with me ? Give me another.” She faced the cliff and whirled again. The
stone spun out, not quite so far as before.

Ottenburg laughed. “Why do you keep on working AFTER you've thrown it ?
You can't help it along then.”

Without replying, Thea stooped and selected another stone, took a deep
breath and made another turn. Fred watched the disk, exclaiming, “Good
girl! You got past the pine that time. That's a good throw.”

She took out her handkerchief and wiped her glowing face and throat,
pausing to feel her right shoulder with her left hand.

“Ah--ha, you've made yourself sore, haven't you ? What did I tell you ?
You go at things too hard. I'll tell you what I'm going to do, Thea,”
 Fred dusted his hands and began tucking in the blouse of his shirt, “I'm
going to make some single-sticks and teach you to fence. You'd be all
right there. You're light and quick and you've got lots of drive in you.
I'd like to have you come at me with foils; you'd look so fierce,” he
chuckled.

She turned away from him and stubbornly sent out another stone, hanging
in the air after its flight. Her fury amused Fred, who took all games
lightly and played them well. She was breathing hard, and little beads
of moisture had gathered on her upper lip. He slipped his arm about her.
“If you will look as pretty as that--” he bent his head and kissed her.
Thea was startled, gave him an angry push, drove at him with her free
hand in a manner quite hostile. Fred was on his mettle in an instant. He
pinned both her arms down and kissed her resolutely.

When he released her, she turned away and spoke over her shoulder. “That
was mean of you, but I suppose I deserved what I got.”

“I should say you did deserve it,” Fred panted, “turning savage on me
like that! I should say you did deserve it!”

He saw her shoulders harden. “Well, I just said I deserved it, didn't I ?
What more do you want ?”

“I want you to tell me why you flew at me like that! You weren't
playing; you looked as if you'd like to murder me.”

She brushed back her hair impatiently. “I didn't mean anything, really.
You interrupted me when I was watching the stone. I can't jump from one
thing to another. I pushed you without thinking.”

Fred thought her back expressed contrition. He went up to her, stood
behind her with his chin above her shoulder, and said something in her
ear. Thea laughed and turned toward him. They left the stone-pile
carelessly, as if they had never been interested in it, rounded the
yellow tower, and disappeared into the second turn of the canyon, where
the dead city, interrupted by the jutting promontory, began again.

Old Biltmer had been somewhat embarrassed by the turn the game had
taken. He had not heard their conversation, but the pantomime against
the rocks was clear enough. When the two young people disappeared, their
host retreated rapidly toward the head of the canyon.

“I guess that young lady can take care of herself,” he chuckled. “Young
Fred, though, he has quite a way with them.”




VI

DAY was breaking over Panther Canyon. The gulf was cold and full of
heavy, purplish twilight. The wood smoke which drifted from one of the
cliff-houses hung in a blue scarf across the chasm, until the draft
caught it and whirled it away. Thea was crouching in the doorway of her
rock house, while Ottenburg looked after the crackling fire in the next
cave. He was waiting for it to burn down to coals before he put the
coffee on to boil.

They had left the ranch house that morning a little after three o'clock,
having packed their camp equipment the day before, and had crossed the
open pasture land with their lantern while the stars were still bright.
During the descent into the canyon by lantern-light, they were chilled
through their coats and sweaters. The lantern crept slowly along the
rock trail, where the heavy air seemed to offer resistance. The voice of
the stream at the bottom of the gorge was hollow and threatening, much
louder and deeper than it ever was by day--another voice altogether. The
sullenness of the place seemed to say that the world could get on very
well without people, red or white; that under the human world there was
a geological world, conducting its silent, immense operations which were
indifferent to man. Thea had often seen the desert sunrise,--a
lighthearted affair, where the sun springs out of bed and the world is
golden in an instant. But this canyon seemed to waken like an old man,
with rheum and stiffness of the joints, with heaviness, and a dull,
malignant mind. She crouched against the wall while the stars faded, and
thought what courage the early races must have had to endure so much for
the little they got out of life.

At last a kind of hopefulness broke in the air. In a moment the
pine trees up on the edge of the rim were flashing with coppery
fire. The thin red clouds which hung above their pointed tops began to
boil and move rapidly, weaving in and out like smoke. The swallows
darted out of their rock houses as at a signal, and flew upward, toward
the rim. Little brown birds began to chirp in the bushes along the
watercourse down at the bottom of the ravine, where everything was still
dusky and pale. At first the golden light seemed to hang like a wave
upon the rim of the canyon; the trees and bushes up there, which one
scarcely noticed at noon, stood out magnified by the slanting rays.
Long, thin streaks of light began to reach quiveringly down into the
canyon. The red sun rose rapidly above the tops of the blazing pines,
and its glow burst into the gulf, about the very doorstep on which Thea
sat. It bored into the wet, dark underbrush. The dripping cherry bushes,
the pale aspens, and the frosty PINONS were glittering and trembling,
swimming in the liquid gold. All the pale, dusty little herbs of the
bean family, never seen by any one but a botanist, became for a moment
individual and important, their silky leaves quite beautiful with dew
and light. The arch of sky overhead, heavy as lead a little while
before, lifted, became more and more transparent, and one could look up
into depths of pearly blue.

The savor of coffee and bacon mingled with the smell of wet cedars
drying, and Fred called to Thea that he was ready for her. They sat down
in the doorway of his kitchen, with the warmth of the live coals behind
them and the sunlight on their faces, and began their breakfast, Mrs.
Biltmer's thick coffee cups and the cream bottle between them, the
coffee-pot and frying-pan conveniently keeping hot among the embers.

“I thought you were going back on the whole proposition, Thea, when you
were crawling along with that lantern. I couldn't get a word out of
you.”

“I know. I was cold and hungry, and I didn't believe there was going to
be any morning, anyway. Didn't you feel queer, at all ?”

Fred squinted above his smoking cup. “Well, I am never strong for
getting up before the sun. The world looks unfurnished. When I first lit
the fire and had a square look at you, I thought I'd got the wrong girl.
Pale, grim--you were a sight!”

Thea leaned back into the shadow of the rock room and warmed her hands
over the coals. “It was dismal enough. How warm these walls are, all the
way round; and your breakfast is so good. I'm all right now, Fred.”

“Yes, you're all right now.” Fred lit a cigarette and looked at her
critically as her head emerged into the sun again. “You get up every
morning just a little bit handsomer than you were the day before. I'd
love you just as much if you were not turning into one of the loveliest
women I've ever seen; but you are, and that's a fact to be reckoned
with.” He watched her across the thin line of smoke he blew from his
lips. “What are you going to do with all that beauty and all that
talent, Miss Kronborg ?”

She turned away to the fire again. “I don't know what you're talking
about,” she muttered with an awkwardness which did not conceal her
pleasure.

Ottenburg laughed softly. “Oh, yes, you do! Nobody better! You're a
close one, but you give yourself away sometimes, like everybody else. Do
you know, I've decided that you never do a single thing without an
ulterior motive.” He threw away his cigarette, took out his
tobacco-pouch and began to fill his pipe. “You ride and fence and walk
and climb, but I know that all the while you're getting somewhere in
your mind. All these things are instruments; and I, too, am an
instrument.” He looked up in time to intercept a quick, startled glance
from Thea. “Oh, I don't mind,” he chuckled; “not a bit. Every woman,
every interesting woman, has ulterior motives, many of 'em less
creditable than yours. It's your constancy that amuses me. You must have
been doing it ever since you were two feet high.”

Thea looked slowly up at her companion's good-humored face. His eyes,
sometimes too restless and sympathetic in town, had grown steadier and
clearer in the open air. His short curly beard and yellow hair had
reddened in the sun and wind. The pleasant vigor of his person was
always delightful to her, something to signal to and laugh with in a
world of negative people. With Fred she was never becalmed. There was
always life in the air, always something coming and going, a rhythm of
feeling and action,--stronger than the natural accord of youth. As she
looked at him, leaning against the sunny wall, she felt a desire to be
frank with him. She was not willfully holding anything back. But, on the
other hand, she could not force things that held themselves back. “Yes,
it was like that when I was little,” she said at last. “I had to be
close, as you call it, or go under. But I didn't know I had been like
that since you came. I've had nothing to be close about. I haven't
thought about anything but having a good time with you. I've just
drifted.”

Fred blew a trail of smoke out into the breeze and looked knowing. “Yes,
you drift like a rifle ball, my dear. It's your--your direction that I
like best of all. Most fellows wouldn't, you know. I'm unusual.”

They both laughed, but Thea frowned questioningly. “Why wouldn't most
fellows ? Other fellows have liked me.”

“Yes, serious fellows. You told me yourself they were all old, or
solemn. But jolly fellows want to be the whole target. They would say
you were all brain and muscle; that you have no feeling.”

She glanced at him sidewise. “Oh, they would, would they ?”

“Of course they would,” Fred continued blandly. “Jolly fellows have no
imagination. They want to be the animating force. When they are not
around, they want a girl to be--extinct,” he waved his hand. “Old
fellows like Mr. Nathanmeyer understand your kind; but among the young
ones, you are rather lucky to have found me. Even I wasn't always so
wise. I've had my time of thinking it would not bore me to be the Apollo
of a homey flat, and I've paid out a trifle to learn better. All those
things get very tedious unless they are hooked up with an idea of some
sort. It's because we DON'T come out here only to look at each other and
drink coffee that it's so pleasant to--look at each other.” Fred drew
on his pipe for a while, studying Thea's abstraction. She was staring up
at the far wall of the canyon with a troubled expression that drew her
eyes narrow and her mouth hard. Her hands lay in her lap, one over the
other, the fingers interlacing. “Suppose,” Fred came out at
length,--“suppose I were to offer you what most of the young men I know
would offer a girl they'd been sitting up nights about: a comfortable
flat in Chicago, a summer camp up in the woods, musical evenings, and a
family to bring up. Would it look attractive to you ?”

Thea sat up straight and stared at him in alarm, glared into his eyes.
“Perfectly hideous!” she exclaimed.

Fred dropped back against the old stonework and laughed deep in his
chest. “Well, don't be frightened. I won't offer them. You're not a
nest-building bird. You know I always liked your song, 'Me for the jolt
of the breakers!' I understand.”

She rose impatiently and walked to the edge of the cliff. “It's not that
so much. It's waking up every morning with the feeling that your life is
your own, and your strength is your own, and your talent is your own;
that you're all there, and there's no sag in you.” She stood for a
moment as if she were tortured by uncertainty, then turned suddenly back
to him. “Don't talk about these things any more now,” she entreated. “It
isn't that I want to keep anything from you. The trouble is that I've
got nothing to keep--except (you know as well as I) that feeling. I told
you about it in Chicago once. But it always makes me unhappy to talk
about it. It will spoil the day. Will you go for a climb with me ?” She
held out her hands with a smile so eager that it made Ottenburg feel how
much she needed to get away from herself.

He sprang up and caught the hands she put out so cordially, and stood
swinging them back and forth. “I won't tease you. A word's enough to me.
But I love it, all the same. Understand ?” He pressed her hands and
dropped them. “Now, where are you going to drag me ?”

“I want you to drag me. Over there, to the other houses. They are more
interesting than these.” She pointed across the gorge to the row of
white houses in the other cliff. “The trail is broken away, but I got up
there once. It's possible. You have to go to the bottom of the canyon,
cross the creek, and then go up hand-over-hand.”

Ottenburg, lounging against the sunny wall, his hands in the pockets of
his jacket, looked across at the distant dwellings. “It's an awful
climb,” he sighed, “when I could be perfectly happy here with my pipe.
However--” He took up his stick and hat and followed Thea down the water
trail. “Do you climb this path every day ? You surely earn your bath. I
went down and had a look at your pool the other afternoon. Neat place,
with all those little cottonwoods. Must be very becoming.”

“Think so ?” Thea said over her shoulder, as she swung round a turn.

“Yes, and so do you, evidently. I'm becoming expert at reading your
meaning in your back. I'm behind you so much on these single-foot
trails. You don't wear stays, do you ?”

“Not here.”

“I wouldn't, anywhere, if I were you. They will make you less elastic.
The side muscles get flabby. If you go in for opera, there's a fortune
in a flexible body. Most of the German singers are clumsy, even when
they're well set up.”

Thea switched a PINON branch back at him. “Oh, I'll never get fat! That
I can promise you.”

Fred smiled, looking after her. “Keep that promise, no matter how many
others you break,” he drawled.

The upward climb, after they had crossed the stream, was at first a
breathless scramble through underbrush. When they reached the big
boulders, Ottenburg went first because he had the longer leg-reach, and
gave Thea a hand when the step was quite beyond her, swinging her up
until she could get a foothold. At last they reached a little platform
among the rocks, with only a hundred feet of jagged, sloping wall
between them and the cliff-houses.

Ottenburg lay down under a pine tree and declared that he was going to
have a pipe before he went any farther. “It's a good thing to know when
to stop, Thea,” he said meaningly.

“I'm not going to stop now until I get there,” Thea insisted. “I'll go
on alone.”

Fred settled his shoulder against the tree-trunk. “Go on if you like,
but I'm here to enjoy myself. If you meet a rattler on the way, have it
out with him.”

She hesitated, fanning herself with her felt hat. “I never have met
one.”

“There's reasoning for you,” Fred murmured languidly.

Thea turned away resolutely and began to go up the wall, using an
irregular cleft in the rock for a path. The cliff, which looked almost
perpendicular from the bottom, was really made up of ledges and
boulders, and behind these she soon disappeared. For a long while Fred
smoked with half-closed eyes, smiling to himself now and again.
Occasionally he lifted an eyebrow as he heard the rattle of small stones
among the rocks above. “In a temper,” he concluded; “do her good.” Then
he subsided into warm drowsiness and listened to the locusts in the
yuccas, and the tap-tap of the old woodpecker that was never weary of
assaulting the big pine.

Fred had finished his pipe and was wondering whether he wanted another,
when he heard a call from the cliff far above him. Looking up, he saw
Thea standing on the edge of a projecting crag. She waved to him and
threw her arm over her head, as if she were snapping her fingers in the
air.

As he saw her there between the sky and the gulf, with that great wash
of air and the morning light about her, Fred recalled the brilliant
figure at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's. Thea was one of those people who emerge,
unexpectedly, larger than we are accustomed to see them. Even at this
distance one got the impression of muscular energy and audacity,--a kind
of brilliancy of motion,--of a personality that carried across big
spaces and expanded among big things. Lying still, with his hands under
his head, Ottenburg rhetorically addressed the figure in the air. “You
are the sort that used to run wild in Germany, dressed in their hair and
a piece of skin. Soldiers caught 'em in nets. Old Nathanmeyer,” he
mused, “would like a peep at her now. Knowing old fellow. Always buying
those Zorn etchings of peasant girls bathing. No sag in them either.
Must be the cold climate.” He sat up. “She'll begin to pitch rocks on me
if I don't move.” In response to another impatient gesture from the
crag, he rose and began swinging slowly up the trail.


It was the afternoon of that long day. Thea was lying on a blanket in
the door of her rock house. She and Ottenburg had come back from their
climb and had lunch, and he had gone off for a nap in one of the
cliff-houses farther down the path. He was sleeping peacefully, his coat
under his head and his face turned toward the wall.

Thea, too, was drowsy, and lay looking through halfclosed eyes up at the
blazing blue arch over the rim of the canyon. She was thinking of
nothing at all. Her mind, like her body, was full of warmth, lassitude,
physical content. Suddenly an eagle, tawny and of great size, sailed
over the cleft in which she lay, across the arch of sky. He dropped for
a moment into the gulf between the walls, then wheeled, and mounted
until his plumage was so steeped in light that he looked like a golden
bird. He swept on, following the course of the canyon a little way and
then disappearing beyond the rim. Thea sprang to her feet as if she had
been thrown up from the rock by volcanic action. She stood rigid on the
edge of the stone shelf, straining her eyes after that strong, tawny
flight. O eagle of eagles! Endeavor, achievement, desire, glorious
striving of human art! From a cleft in the heart of the world she
saluted it...It had come all the way; when men lived in caves, it was
there. A vanished race; but along the trails, in the stream, under the
spreading cactus, there still glittered in the sun the bits of their
frail clay vessels, fragments of their desire.




VII

FROM the day of Fred's arrival, he and Thea were unceasingly active.
They took long rides into the Navajo pine forests, bought turquoises and
silver bracelets from the wandering Indian herdsmen, and rode twenty
miles to Flagstaff upon the slightest pretext. Thea had never felt this
pleasant excitement about any man before, and she found herself trying
very hard to please young Ottenburg. She was never tired, never dull.
There was a zest about waking up in the morning and dressing, about
walking, riding, even about sleep.

One morning when Thea came out from her room at seven o'clock, she found
Henry and Fred on the porch, looking up at the sky. The day was already
hot and there was no breeze. The sun was shining, but heavy brown clouds
were hanging in the west, like the smoke of a forest fire. She and Fred
had meant to ride to Flagstaff that morning, but Biltmer advised against
it, foretelling a storm. After breakfast they lingered about the house,
waiting for the weather to make up its mind. Fred had brought his
guitar, and as they had the dining-room to themselves, he made Thea go
over some songs with him. They got interested and kept it up until Mrs.
Biltmer came to set the table for dinner. Ottenburg knew some of the
Mexican things Spanish Johnny used to sing. Thea had never before
happened to tell him about Spanish Johnny, and he seemed more interested
in Johnny than in Dr. Archie or Wunsch.

After dinner they were too restless to endure the ranch house any
longer, and ran away to the canyon to practice with single-sticks. Fred
carried a slicker and a sweater, and he made Thea wear one of the rubber
hats that hung in Biltmer's gun-room. As they crossed the pasture land
the clumsy slicker kept catching in the lacings of his leggings.

“Why don't you drop that thing ?” Thea asked. “I won't mind a shower.
I've been wet before.”

“No use taking chances.”

From the canyon they were unable to watch the sky, since only a strip of
the zenith was visible. The flat ledge about the watch-tower was the
only level spot large enough for single-stick exercise, and they were
still practicing there when, at about four o'clock, a tremendous roll of
thunder echoed between the cliffs and the atmosphere suddenly became
thick.

Fred thrust the sticks in a cleft in the rock. “We're in for it, Thea.
Better make for your cave where there are blankets.” He caught her elbow
and hurried her along the path before the cliff-houses. They made the
half-mile at a quick trot, and as they ran the rocks and the sky and the
air between the cliffs turned a turbid green, like the color in a moss
agate. When they reached the blanketed rock room, they looked at each
other and laughed. Their faces had taken on a greenish pallor. Thea's
hair, even, was green.

“Dark as pitch in here,” Fred exclaimed as they hurried over the old
rock doorstep. “But it's warm. The rocks hold the heat. It's going to be
terribly cold outside, all right.” He was interrupted by a deafening
peal of thunder. “Lord, what an echo! Lucky you don't mind. It's worth
watching out there. We needn't come in yet.”

The green light grew murkier and murkier. The smaller vegetation was
blotted out. The yuccas, the cedars, and PINONS stood dark and rigid,
like bronze. The swallows flew up with sharp, terrified twitterings.
Even the quaking asps were still. While Fred and Thea watched from the
doorway, the light changed to purple. Clouds of dark vapor, like
chlorine gas, began to float down from the head of the canyon and hung
between them and the cliff-houses in the opposite wall. Before they knew
it, the wall itself had disappeared. The air was positively
venomous-looking, and grew colder every minute. The thunder seemed to
crash against one cliff, then against the other, and to go shrieking off
into the inner canyon.

The moment the rain broke, it beat the vapors down. In the gulf before
them the water fell in spouts, and dashed from the high cliffs overhead.
It tore aspens and chokecherry bushes out of the ground and left the
yuccas hanging by their tough roots. Only the little cedars stood black
and unmoved in the torrents that fell from so far above. The rock
chamber was full of fine spray from the streams of water that shot over
the doorway. Thea crept to the back wall and rolled herself in a
blanket, and Fred threw the heavier blankets over her. The wool of the
Navajo sheep was soon kindled by the warmth of her body, and was
impenetrable to dampness. Her hair, where it hung below the rubber hat,
gathered the moisture like a sponge. Fred put on the slicker, tied the
sweater about his neck, and settled himself cross-legged beside her. The
chamber was so dark that, although he could see the outline of her head
and shoulders, he could not see her face. He struck a wax match to light
his pipe. As he sheltered it between his hands, it sizzled and
sputtered, throwing a yellow flicker over Thea and her blankets.

“You look like a gypsy,” he said as he dropped the match. “Any one you'd
rather be shut up with than me ? No ? Sure about that ?”

“I think I am. Aren't you cold ?”

“Not especially.” Fred smoked in silence, listening to the roar of the
water outside. “We may not get away from here right away,” he remarked.

“I shan't mind. Shall you ?”

He laughed grimly and pulled on his pipe. “Do you know where you're at,
Miss Thea Kronborg ?” he said at last. “You've got me going pretty hard,
I suppose you know. I've had a lot of sweethearts, but I've never been
so much--engrossed before. What are you going to do about it ?” He heard
nothing from the blankets. “Are you going to play fair, or is it about
my cue to cut away ?”

“I'll play fair. I don't see why you want to go.”

“What do you want me around for ?--to play with ?”

Thea struggled up among the blankets. “I want you for everything. I
don't know whether I'm what people call in love with you or not. In
Moonstone that meant sitting in a hammock with somebody. I don't want to
sit in a hammock with you, but I want to do almost everything else. Oh,
hundreds of things!”

“If I run away, will you go with me ?”

“I don't know. I'll have to think about that. Maybe I would.” She freed
herself from her wrappings and stood up. “It's not raining so hard now.
Hadn't we better start this minute ? It will be night before we get to
Biltmer's.”

Fred struck another match. “It's seven. I don't know how much of the
path may be washed away. I don't even know whether I ought to let you
try it without a lantern.”

Thea went to the doorway and looked out. “There's nothing else to do.
The sweater and the slicker will keep me dry, and this will be my chance
to find out whether these shoes are really water-tight. They cost a
week's salary.” She retreated to the back of the cave. “It's getting
blacker every minute.”

Ottenburg took a brandy flask from his coat pocket. “Better have some of
this before we start. Can you take it without water ?”

Thea lifted it obediently to her lips. She put on the sweater and Fred
helped her to get the clumsy slicker on over it. He buttoned it and
fastened the high collar. She could feel that his hands were hurried and
clumsy. The coat was too big, and he took off his necktie and belted it
in at the waist. While she tucked her hair more securely under the
rubber hat he stood in front of her, between her and the gray doorway,
without moving.

“Are you ready to go ?” she asked carelessly.

“If you are,” he spoke quietly, without moving, except to bend his head
forward a little.

Thea laughed and put her hands on his shoulders. “You know how to handle
me, don't you ?” she whispered. For the first time, she kissed him
without constraint or embarrassment.

“Thea, Thea, Thea!” Fred whispered her name three times, shaking her a
little as if to waken her. It was too dark to see, but he could feel
that she was smiling.

When she kissed him she had not hidden her face on his shoulder,--she
had risen a little on her toes, and stood straight and free. In that
moment when he came close to her actual personality, he felt in her the
same expansion that he had noticed at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's. She became
freer and stronger under impulses. When she rose to meet him like that,
he felt her flash into everything that she had ever suggested to him, as
if she filled out her own shadow.

She pushed him away and shot past him out into the rain. “Now for it,
Fred,” she called back exultantly. The rain was pouring steadily down
through the dying gray twilight, and muddy streams were spouting and
foaming over the cliff.

Fred caught her and held her back. “Keep behind me, Thea. I don't know
about the path. It may be gone altogether. Can't tell what there is
under this water.”

But the path was older than the white man's Arizona. The rush of water
had washed away the dust and stones that lay on the surface, but the
rock skeleton of the Indian trail was there, ready for the foot. Where
the streams poured down through gullies, there was always a cedar or a
PINON to cling to. By wading and slipping and climbing, they got along.
As they neared the head of the canyon, where the path lifted and rose in
steep loops to the surface of the plateau, the climb was more difficult.
The earth above had broken away and washed down over the trail, bringing
rocks and bushes and even young trees with it. The last ghost of
daylight was dying and there was no time to lose. The canyon behind them
was already black.

“We've got to go right through the top of this pine tree, Thea. No time
to hunt a way around. Give me your hand.” After they had crashed through
the mass of branches, Fred stopped abruptly. “Gosh, what a hole! Can you
jump it ? Wait a minute.”

He cleared the washout, slipped on the wet rock at the farther side, and
caught himself just in time to escape a tumble. “If I could only find
something to hold to, I could give you a hand. It's so cursed dark, and
there are no trees here where they're needed. Here's something; it's a
root. It will hold all right.” He braced himself on the rock, gripped
the crooked root with one hand and swung himself across toward Thea,
holding out his arm. “Good jump! I must say you don't lose your nerve in
a tight place. Can you keep at it a little longer ? We're almost out.
Have to make that next ledge. Put your foot on my knee and catch
something to pull by.”

Thea went up over his shoulder. “It's hard ground up here,” she panted.
“Did I wrench your arm when I slipped then ? It was a cactus I grabbed,
and it startled me.”

“Now, one more pull and we're on the level.”

They emerged gasping upon the black plateau. In the last five minutes
the darkness had solidified and it seemed as if the skies were pouring
black water. They could not see where the sky ended or the plain began.
The light at the ranch house burned a steady spark through the rain.
Fred drew Thea's arm through his and they struck off toward the light.
They could not see each other, and the rain at their backs seemed to
drive them along. They kept laughing as they stumbled over tufts of
grass or stepped into slippery pools. They were delighted with each
other and with the adventure which lay behind them.

“I can't even see the whites of your eyes, Thea. But I'd know who was
here stepping out with me, anywhere. Part coyote you are, by the feel of
you. When you make up your mind to jump, you jump! My gracious, what's
the matter with your hand ?”

“Cactus spines. Didn't I tell you when I grabbed the cactus ? I thought
it was a root. Are we going straight ?”

“I don't know. Somewhere near it, I think. I'm very comfortable, aren't
you ? You're warm, except your cheeks. How funny they are when they're
wet. Still, you always feel like you. I like this. I could walk to
Flagstaff. It's fun, not being able to see anything. I feel surer of you
when I can't see you. Will you run away with me ?”

Thea laughed. “I won't run far to-night. I'll think about it. Look,
Fred, there's somebody coming.”

“Henry, with his lantern. Good enough! Halloo! Hallo--o--o!” Fred
shouted.

The moving light bobbed toward them. In half an hour Thea was in her big
feather bed, drinking hot lentil soup, and almost before the soup was
swallowed she was asleep.




VIII

ON the first day of September Fred Ottenburg and Thea Kronborg left
Flagstaff by the east-bound express. As the bright morning advanced,
they sat alone on the rear platform of the observation car, watching the
yellow miles unfold and disappear. With complete content they saw the
brilliant, empty country flash by. They were tired of the desert and the
dead races, of a world without change or ideas. Fred said he was glad to
sit back and let the Santa Fe do the work for a while.

“And where are we going, anyhow ?” he added.

“To Chicago, I suppose. Where else would we be going ?” Thea hunted for a
handkerchief in her handbag.

“I wasn't sure, so I had the trunks checked to Albuquerque. We can
recheck there to Chicago, if you like. Why Chicago ? You'll never go back
to Bowers. Why wouldn't this be a good time to make a run for it ? We
could take the southern branch at Albuquerque, down to El Paso, and then
over into Mexico. We are exceptionally free. Nobody waiting for us
anywhere.”

Thea sighted along the steel rails that quivered in the light behind
them. “I don't see why I couldn't marry you in Chicago, as well as any
place,” she brought out with some embarrassment.

Fred took the handbag out of her nervous clasp and swung it about on his
finger. “You've no particular love for that spot, have you ? Besides, as
I've told you, my family would make a row. They are an excitable lot.
They discuss and argue everlastingly. The only way I can ever put
anything through is to go ahead, and convince them afterward.”

“Yes; I understand. I don't mind that. I don't want to marry your
family. I'm sure you wouldn't want to marry mine. But I don't see why we
have to go so far.”

“When we get to Winslow, you look about the freight yards and you'll
probably see several yellow cars with my name on them. That's why, my
dear. When your visiting-card is on every beer bottle, you can't do
things quietly. Things get into the papers.” As he watched her troubled
expression, he grew anxious. He leaned forward on his camp-chair, and
kept twirling the handbag between his knees. “Here's a suggestion,
Thea,” he said presently. “Dismiss it if you don't like it: suppose we
go down to Mexico on the chance. You've never seen anything like Mexico
City; it will be a lark for you, anyhow. If you change your mind, and
don't want to marry me, you can go back to Chicago, and I'll take a
steamer from Vera Cruz and go up to New York. When I get to Chicago,
you'll be at work, and nobody will ever be the wiser. No reason why we
shouldn't both travel in Mexico, is there ? You'll be traveling alone.
I'll merely tell you the right places to stop, and come to take you
driving. I won't put any pressure on you. Have I ever ?” He swung the bag
toward her and looked up under her hat.

“No, you haven't,” she murmured. She was thinking that her own position
might be less difficult if he had used what he called pressure. He
clearly wished her to take the responsibility.

“You have your own future in the back of your mind all the time,” Fred
began, “and I have it in mine. I'm not going to try to carry you off, as
I might another girl. If you wanted to quit me, I couldn't hold you, no
matter how many times you had married me. I don't want to overpersuade
you. But I'd like mighty well to get you down to that jolly old city,
where everything would please you, and give myself a chance. Then, if
you thought you could have a better time with me than without me, I'd
try to grab you before you changed your mind. You are not a sentimental
person.”

Thea drew her veil down over her face. “I think I am, a little; about
you,” she said quietly. Fred's irony somehow hurt her.

“What's at the bottom of your mind, Thea ?” he asked hurriedly. “I can't
tell. Why do you consider it at all, if you're not sure ? Why are you
here with me now ?”

Her face was half-averted. He was thinking that it looked older and more
firm--almost hard--under a veil.

“Isn't it possible to do things without having any very clear reason ?”
 she asked slowly. “I have no plan in the back of my mind. Now that I'm
with you, I want to be with you; that's all. I can't settle down to
being alone again. I am here to-day because I want to be with you
to-day.” She paused. “One thing, though; if I gave you my word, I'd keep
it. And you could hold me, though you don't seem to think so. Maybe I'm
not sentimental, but I'm not very light, either. If I went off with you
like this, it wouldn't be to amuse myself.”

Ottenburg's eyes fell. His lips worked nervously for a moment. “Do you
mean that you really care for me, Thea Kronborg ?” he asked unsteadily.

“I guess so. It's like anything else. It takes hold of you and you've
got to go through with it, even if you're afraid. I was afraid to leave
Moonstone, and afraid to leave Harsanyi. But I had to go through with
it.”

“And are you afraid now ?” Fred asked slowly.

“Yes; more than I've ever been. But I don't think I could go back. The
past closes up behind one, somehow. One would rather have a new kind of
misery. The old kind seems like death or unconsciousness. You can't
force your life back into that mould again. No, one can't go back.” She
rose and stood by the back grating of the platform, her hand on the
brass rail.

Fred went to her side. She pushed up her veil and turned her most
glowing face to him. Her eyes were wet and there were tears on her
lashes, but she was smiling the rare, whole-hearted smile he had seen
once or twice before. He looked at her shining eyes, her parted lips,
her chin a little lifted. It was as if they were colored by a sunrise he
could not see. He put his hand over hers and clasped it with a strength
she felt. Her eyelashes trembled, her mouth softened, but her eyes were
still brilliant.

“Will you always be like you were down there, if I go with you ?” she
asked under her breath.

His fingers tightened on hers. “By God, I will!” he muttered.

“That's the only promise I'll ask you for. Now go away for a while and
let me think about it. Come back at lunchtime and I'll tell you. Will
that do ?”

“Anything will do, Thea, if you'll only let me keep an eye on you. The
rest of the world doesn't interest me much. You've got me in deep.”

Fred dropped her hand and turned away. As he glanced back from the front
end of the observation car, he saw that she was still standing there,
and any one would have known that she was brooding over something. The
earnestness of her head and shoulders had a certain nobility. He stood
looking at her for a moment.

When he reached the forward smoking-car, Fred took a seat at the end,
where he could shut the other passengers from his sight. He put on his
traveling-cap and sat down wearily, keeping his head near the window.
“In any case, I shall help her more than I shall hurt her,” he kept
saying to himself. He admitted that this was not the only motive which
impelled him, but it was one of them. “I'll make it my business in life
to get her on. There's nothing else I care about so much as seeing her
have her chance. She hasn't touched her real force yet. She isn't even
aware of it. Lord, don't I know something about them ? There isn't one of
them that has such a depth to draw from. She'll be one of the great
artists of our time. Playing accompaniments for that cheese-faced sneak!
I'll get her off to Germany this winter, or take her. She hasn't got any
time to waste now. I'll make it up to her, all right.”

Ottenburg certainly meant to make it up to her, in so far as he could.
His feeling was as generous as strong human feelings are likely to be.
The only trouble was, that he was married already, and had been since he
was twenty.

His older friends in Chicago, people who had been friends of his family,
knew of the unfortunate state of his personal affairs; but they were
people whom in the natural course of things Thea Kronborg would scarcely
meet. Mrs. Frederick Ottenburg lived in California, at Santa Barbara,
where her health was supposed to be better than elsewhere, and her
husband lived in Chicago. He visited his wife every winter to reinforce
her position, and his devoted mother, although her hatred for her
daughter-inlaw was scarcely approachable in words, went to Santa Barbara
every year to make things look better and to relieve her son.


When Frederick Ottenburg was beginning his junior year at Harvard, he
got a letter from Dick Brisbane, a Kansas City boy he knew, telling him
that his FIANCEE, Miss Edith Beers, was going to New York to buy her
trousseau. She would be at the Holland House, with her aunt and a girl
from Kansas City who was to be a bridesmaid, for two weeks or more. If
Ottenburg happened to be going down to New York, would he call upon Miss
Beers and “show her a good time” ?

Fred did happen to be going to New York. He was going down from New
Haven, after the Thanksgiving game. He called on Miss Beers and found
her, as he that night telegraphed Brisbane, a “ripping beauty, no
mistake.” He took her and her aunt and her uninteresting friend to the
theater and to the opera, and he asked them to lunch with him at the
Waldorf. He took no little pains in arranging the luncheon with the head
waiter. Miss Beers was the sort of girl with whom a young man liked to
seem experienced. She was dark and slender and fiery. She was witty and
slangy; said daring things and carried them off with NONCHALANCE. Her
childish extravagance and contempt for all the serious facts of life
could be charged to her father's generosity and his long packing-house
purse. Freaks that would have been vulgar and ostentatious in a more
simpleminded girl, in Miss Beers seemed whimsical and picturesque. She
darted about in magnificent furs and pumps and close-clinging gowns,
though that was the day of full skirts. Her hats were large and floppy.
When she wriggled out of her moleskin coat at luncheon, she looked like
a slim black weasel. Her satin dress was a mere sheath, so conspicuous
by its severity and scantness that every one in the dining-room stared.
She ate nothing but alligator-pear salad and hothouse grapes, drank a
little champagne, and took cognac in her coffee. She ridiculed, in the
raciest slang, the singers they had heard at the opera the night before,
and when her aunt pretended to reprove her, she murmured indifferently,
“What's the matter with you, old sport ?” She rattled on with a subdued
loquaciousness, always keeping her voice low and monotonous, always
looking out of the corner of her eye and speaking, as it were, in
asides, out of the corner of her mouth. She was scornful of
everything,--which became her eyebrows. Her face was mobile and
discontented, her eyes quick and black. There was a sort of smouldering
fire about her, young Ottenburg thought. She entertained him
prodigiously.

After luncheon Miss Beers said she was going uptown to be fitted, and
that she would go alone because her aunt made her nervous. When Fred
held her coat for her, she murmured, “Thank you, Alphonse,” as if she
were addressing the waiter. As she stepped into a hansom, with a long
stretch of thin silk stocking, she said negligently, over her fur
collar, “Better let me take you along and drop you somewhere.” He sprang
in after her, and she told the driver to go to the Park.

It was a bright winter day, and bitterly cold. Miss Beers asked Fred to
tell her about the game at New Haven, and when he did so paid no
attention to what he said. She sank back into the hansom and held her
muff before her face, lowering it occasionally to utter laconic remarks
about the people in the carriages they passed, interrupting Fred's
narrative in a disconcerting manner. As they entered the Park he
happened to glance under her wide black hat at her black eyes and
hair--the muff hid everything else--and discovered that she was crying.
To his solicitous inquiry she replied that it “was enough to make you
damp, to go and try on dresses to marry a man you weren't keen about.”

Further explanations followed. She had thought she was “perfectly
cracked” about Brisbane, until she met Fred at the Holland House three
days ago. Then she knew she would scratch Brisbane's eyes out if she
married him. What was she going to do ?

Fred told the driver to keep going. What did she want to do ? Well, she
didn't know. One had to marry somebody, after all the machinery had been
put in motion. Perhaps she might as well scratch Brisbane as anybody
else; for scratch she would, if she didn't get what she wanted.

Of course, Fred agreed, one had to marry somebody. And certainly this
girl beat anything he had ever been up against before. Again he told the
driver to go ahead. Did she mean that she would think of marrying him,
by any chance ? Of course she did, Alphonse. Hadn't he seen that all over
her face three days ago ? If he hadn't, he was a snowball.

By this time Fred was beginning to feel sorry for the driver. Miss
Beers, however, was compassionless. After a few more turns, Fred
suggested tea at the Casino. He was very cold himself, and remembering
the shining silk hose and pumps, he wondered that the girl was not
frozen. As they got out of the hansom, he slipped the driver a bill and
told him to have something hot while he waited.

At the tea-table, in a snug glass enclosure, with the steam sputtering
in the pipes beside them and a brilliant winter sunset without, they
developed their plan. Miss Beers had with her plenty of money, destined
for tradesmen, which she was quite willing to divert into other
channels--the first excitement of buying a trousseau had worn off,
anyway. It was very much like any other shopping. Fred had his allowance
and a few hundred he had won on the game. She would meet him to-morrow
morning at the Jersey ferry. They could take one of the west-bound
Pennsylvania trains and go--anywhere, some place where the laws weren't
too fussy.--Fred had not even thought about the laws!--It would be all
right with her father; he knew Fred's family.

Now that they were engaged, she thought she would like to drive a little
more. They were jerked about in the cab for another hour through the
deserted Park. Miss Beers, having removed her hat, reclined upon Fred's
shoulder.

The next morning they left Jersey City by the latest fast train out.
They had some misadventures, crossed several States before they found a
justice obliging enough to marry two persons whose names automatically
instigated inquiry. The bride's family were rather pleased with her
originality; besides, any one of the Ottenburg boys was clearly a better
match than young Brisbane. With Otto Ottenburg, however, the affair went
down hard, and to his wife, the once proud Katarina Furst, such a
disappointment was almost unbearable. Her sons had always been clay in
her hands, and now the GELIEBTER SOHN had escaped her.

Beers, the packer, gave his daughter a house in St. Louis, and Fred went
into his father's business. At the end of a year, he was mutely
appealing to his mother for sympathy. At the end of two, he was drinking
and in open rebellion. He had learned to detest his wife. Her
wastefulness and cruelty revolted him. The ignorance and the fatuous
conceit which lay behind her grimacing mask of slang and ridicule
humiliated him so deeply that he became absolutely reckless. Her grace
was only an uneasy wriggle, her audacity was the result of insolence and
envy, and her wit was restless spite. As her personal mannerisms grew
more and more odious to him, he began to dull his perceptions with
champagne. He had it for tea, he drank it with dinner, and during the
evening he took enough to insure that he would be well insulated when he
got home. This behavior spread alarm among his friends. It was
scandalous, and it did not occur among brewers. He was violating the
NOBLESSE OBLIGE of his guild. His father and his father's partners
looked alarmed.

When Fred's mother went to him and with clasped hands entreated an
explanation, he told her that the only trouble was that he couldn't hold
enough wine to make life endurable, so he was going to get out from
under and enlist in the navy. He didn't want anything but the shirt on
his back and clean salt air. His mother could look out; he was going to
make a scandal.

Mrs. Otto Ottenburg went to Kansas City to see Mr. Beers, and had the
satisfaction of telling him that he had brought up his daughter like a
savage, EINE UNGEBILDETE. All the Ottenburgs and all the Beers, and many
of their friends, were drawn into the quarrel. It was to public opinion,
however and not to his mother's activities, that Fred owed his partial
escape from bondage. The cosmopolitan brewing world of St. Louis had
conservative standards. The Ottenburgs' friends were not predisposed in
favor of the plunging Kansas City set, and they disliked young Fred's
wife from the day that she was brought among them. They found her
ignorant and ill-bred and insufferably impertinent. When they became
aware of how matters were going between her and Fred, they omitted no
opportunity to snub her. Young Fred had always been popular, and St.
Louis people took up his cause with warmth. Even the younger men, among
whom Mrs. Fred tried to draft a following, at first avoided and then
ignored her. Her defeat was so conspicuous, her life became such a
desert, that she at last consented to accept the house in Santa Barbara
which Mrs. Otto Ottenburg had long owned and cherished. This villa, with
its luxuriant gardens, was the price of Fred's furlough. His mother was
only too glad to offer it in his behalf. As soon as his wife was
established in California, Fred was transferred from St. Louis to
Chicago.

A divorce was the one thing Edith would never, never, give him. She told
him so, and she told his family so, and her father stood behind her. She
would enter into no arrangement that might eventually lead to divorce.
She had insulted her husband before guests and servants, had scratched
his face, thrown hand-mirrors and hairbrushes and nail-scissors at him
often enough, but she knew that Fred was hardly the fellow who would go
into court and offer that sort of evidence. In her behavior with other
men she was discreet.

After Fred went to Chicago, his mother visited him often, and dropped a
word to her old friends there, who were already kindly disposed toward
the young man. They gossiped as little as was compatible with the
interest they felt, undertook to make life agreeable for Fred, and told
his story only where they felt it would do good: to girls who seemed to
find the young brewer attractive. So far, he had behaved well, and had
kept out of entanglements.

Since he was transferred to Chicago, Fred had been abroad several times,
and had fallen more and more into the way of going about among young
artists,--people with whom personal relations were incidental. With
women, and even girls, who had careers to follow, a young man might have
pleasant friendships without being regarded as a prospective suitor or
lover. Among artists his position was not irregular, because with them
his marriageableness was not an issue. His tastes, his enthusiasm, and
his agreeable personality made him welcome.

With Thea Kronborg he had allowed himself more liberty than he usually
did in his friendships or gallantries with young artists, because she
seemed to him distinctly not the marrying kind. She impressed him as
equipped to be an artist, and to be nothing else; already directed,
concentrated, formed as to mental habit. He was generous and
sympathetic, and she was lonely and needed friendship; needed
cheerfulness. She had not much power of reaching out toward useful
people or useful experiences, did not see opportunities. She had no tact
about going after good positions or enlisting the interest of
influential persons. She antagonized people rather than conciliated
them. He discovered at once that she had a merry side, a robust humor
that was deep and hearty, like her laugh, but it slept most of the time
under her own doubts and the dullness of her life. She had not what is
called a “sense of humor.” That is, she had no intellectual humor; no
power to enjoy the absurdities of people, no relish of their
pretentiousness and inconsistencies--which only depressed her. But her
joviality, Fred felt, was an asset, and ought to be developed. He
discovered that she was more receptive and more effective under a
pleasant stimulus than she was under the gray grind which she considered
her salvation. She was still Methodist enough to believe that if a thing
were hard and irksome, it must be good for her. And yet, whatever she
did well was spontaneous. Under the least glow of excitement, as at Mrs.
Nathanmeyer's, he had seen the apprehensive, frowning drudge of Bowers's
studio flash into a resourceful and consciously beautiful woman.

His interest in Thea was serious, almost from the first, and so sincere
that he felt no distrust of himself. He believed that he knew a great
deal more about her possibilities than Bowers knew, and he liked to
think that he had given her a stronger hold on life. She had never seen
herself or known herself as she did at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's musical
evenings. She had been a different girl ever since. He had not
anticipated that she would grow more fond of him than his immediate
usefulness warranted. He thought he knew the ways of artists, and, as he
said, she must have been “at it from her cradle.” He had imagined,
perhaps, but never really believed, that he would find her waiting for
him sometime as he found her waiting on the day he reached the Biltmer
ranch. Once he found her so--well, he did not pretend to be anything
more or less than a reasonably well-intentioned young man. A lovesick
girl or a flirtatious woman he could have handled easily enough. But a
personality like that, unconsciously revealing itself for the first time
under the exaltation of a personal feeling,--what could one do but watch
it ? As he used to say to himself, in reckless moments back there in the
canyon, “You can't put out a sunrise.” He had to watch it, and then he
had to share it.

Besides, was he really going to do her any harm ? The Lord knew he would
marry her if he could! Marriage would be an incident, not an end with
her; he was sure of that. If it were not he, it would be some one else;
some one who would be a weight about her neck, probably; who would hold
her back and beat her down and divert her from the first plunge for
which he felt she was gathering all her energies. He meant to help her,
and he could not think of another man who would. He went over his
unmarried friends, East and West, and he could not think of one who
would know what she was driving at--or care. The clever ones were
selfish, the kindly ones were stupid.

“Damn it, if she's going to fall in love with somebody, it had better be
me than any of the others--of the sort she'd find. Get her tied up with
some conceited ass who'd try to make her over, train her like a puppy!
Give one of 'em a big nature like that, and he'd be horrified. He
wouldn't show his face in the clubs until he'd gone after her and combed
her down to conform to some fool idea in his own head--put there by some
other woman, too, his first sweetheart or his grandmother or a maiden
aunt. At least, I understand her. I know what she needs and where she's
bound, and I mean to see that she has a fighting chance.”

His own conduct looked crooked, he admitted; but he asked himself
whether, between men and women, all ways were not more or less crooked.
He believed those which are called straight were the most dangerous of
all. They seemed to him, for the most part, to lie between windowless
stone walls, and their rectitude had been achieved at the expense of
light and air. In their unquestioned regularity lurked every sort of
human cruelty and meanness, and every kind of humiliation and suffering.
He would rather have any woman he cared for wounded than crushed. He
would deceive her not once, he told himself fiercely, but a hundred
times, to keep her free.


When Fred went back to the observation car at one o'clock, after the
luncheon call, it was empty, and he found Thea alone on the platform.
She put out her hand, and met his eyes.

“It's as I said. Things have closed behind me. I can't go back, so I am
going on--to Mexico ?” She lifted her face with an eager, questioning
smile.

Fred met it with a sinking heart. Had he really hoped she would give him
another answer ? He would have given pretty much anything--But there,
that did no good. He could give only what he had. Things were never
complete in this world; you had to snatch at them as they came or go
without. Nobody could look into her face and draw back, nobody who had
any courage. She had courage enough for anything--look at her mouth and
chin and eyes! Where did it come from, that light ? How could a face, a
familiar face, become so the picture of hope, be painted with the very
colors of youth's exaltation ? She was right; she was not one of those
who draw back. Some people get on by avoiding dangers, others by riding
through them.

They stood by the railing looking back at the sand levels, both feeling
that the train was steaming ahead very fast. Fred's mind was a confusion
of images and ideas. Only two things were clear to him: the force of her
determination, and the belief that, handicapped as he was, he could do
better by her than another man would do. He knew he would always
remember her, standing there with that expectant, forward-looking smile,
enough to turn the future into summer.





PART V. DR. ARCHIE'S VENTURE




I

DR. HOWARD ARCHIE had come down to Denver for a meeting of the
stockholders in the San Felipe silver mine. It was not absolutely
necessary for him to come, but he had no very pressing cases at home.
Winter was closing down in Moonstone, and he dreaded the dullness of it.
On the 10th day of January, therefore, he was registered at the Brown
Palace Hotel. On the morning of the 11th he came down to breakfast to
find the streets white and the air thick with snow. A wild northwester
was blowing down from the mountains, one of those beautiful storms that
wrap Denver in dry, furry snow, and make the city a loadstone to
thousands of men in the mountains and on the plains. The brakemen out on
their box-cars, the miners up in their diggings, the lonely homesteaders
in the sand hills of Yucca and Kit Carson Counties, begin to think of
Denver, muffled in snow, full of food and drink and good cheer, and to
yearn for her with that admiration which makes her, more than other
American cities, an object of sentiment.

Howard Archie was glad he had got in before the storm came. He felt as
cheerful as if he had received a legacy that morning, and he greeted the
clerk with even greater friendliness than usual when he stopped at the
desk for his mail. In the dining-room he found several old friends
seated here and there before substantial breakfasts: cattlemen and
mining engineers from odd corners of the State, all looking fresh and
well pleased with themselves. He had a word with one and another before
he sat down at the little table by a window, where the Austrian head
waiter stood attentively behind a chair. After his breakfast was put
before him, the doctor began to run over his letters. There was one
directed in Thea Kronborg's handwriting, forwarded from Moonstone. He
saw with astonishment, as he put another lump of sugar into his cup,
that this letter bore a New York postmark. He had known that Thea was in
Mexico, traveling with some Chicago people, but New York, to a Denver
man, seems much farther away than Mexico City. He put the letter behind
his plate, upright against the stem of his water goblet, and looked at
it thoughtfully while he drank his second cup of coffee. He had been a
little anxious about Thea; she had not written to him for a long while.

As he never got good coffee at home, the doctor always drank three cups
for breakfast when he was in Denver. Oscar knew just when to bring him a
second pot, fresh and smoking. “And more cream, Oscar, please. You know
I like lots of cream,” the doctor murmured, as he opened the square
envelope, marked in the upper right-hand corner, “Everett House, Union
Square.” The text of the letter was as follows:--

DEAR DOCTOR ARCHIE:--

I have not written to you for a long time, but it has not been
unintentional. I could not write you frankly, and so I would not write
at all. I can be frank with you now, but not by letter. It is a great
deal to ask, but I wonder if you could come to New York to help me out ?
I have got into difficulties, and I need your advice. I need your
friendship. I am afraid I must even ask you to lend me money, if you can
without serious inconvenience. I have to go to Germany to study, and it
can't be put off any longer. My voice is ready. Needless to say, I don't
want any word of this to reach my family. They are the last people I
would turn to, though I love my mother dearly. If you can come, please
telegraph me at this hotel. Don't despair of me. I'll make it up to you
yet.

Your old friend,

THEA KRONBORG.


This in a bold, jagged handwriting with a Gothic turn to the
letters,--something between a highly sophisticated hand and a very
unsophisticated one,--not in the least smooth or flowing.

The doctor bit off the end of a cigar nervously and read the letter
through again, fumbling distractedly in his pockets for matches, while
the waiter kept trying to call his attention to the box he had just
placed before him. At last Oscar came out, as if the idea had just
struck him, “Matches, sir ?”

“Yes, thank you.” The doctor slipped a coin into his palm and rose,
crumpling Thea's letter in his hand and thrusting the others into his
pocket unopened. He went back to the desk in the lobby and beckoned to
the clerk, upon whose kindness he threw himself apologetically.

“Harry, I've got to pull out unexpectedly. Call up the Burlington, will
you, and ask them to route me to New York the quickest way, and to let
us know. Ask for the hour I'll get in. I have to wire.”

“Certainly, Dr. Archie. Have it for you in a minute.” The young man's
pallid, clean-scraped face was all sympathetic interest as he reached
for the telephone. Dr. Archie put out his hand and stopped him.

“Wait a minute. Tell me, first, is Captain Harris down yet ?”

“No, sir. The Captain hasn't come down yet this morning.”

“I'll wait here for him. If I don't happen to catch him, nail him and
get me. Thank you, Harry.”

The doctor spoke gratefully and turned away. He began to pace the lobby,
his hands behind him, watching the bronze elevator doors like a hawk. At
last Captain Harris issued from one of them, tall and imposing, wearing
a Stetson and fierce mustaches, a fur coat on his arm, a solitaire
glittering upon his little finger and another in his black satin ascot.
He was one of the grand old bluffers of those good old days. As gullible
as a schoolboy, he had managed, with his sharp eye and knowing air and
twisted blond mustaches, to pass himself off for an astute financier,
and the Denver papers respectfully referred to him as the Rothschild of
Cripple Creek.

Dr. Archie stopped the Captain on his way to breakfast. “Must see you a
minute, Captain. Can't wait. Want to sell you some shares in the San
Felipe. Got to raise money.”

The Captain grandly bestowed his hat upon an eager porter who had
already lifted his fur coat tenderly from his arm and stood nursing it.
In removing his hat, the Captain exposed a bald, flushed dome, thatched
about the ears with yellowish gray hair. “Bad time to sell, doctor. You
want to hold on to San Felipe, and buy more. What have you got to
raise ?”

“Oh, not a great sum. Five or six thousand. I've been buying up close
and have run short.”

“I see, I see. Well, doctor, you'll have to let me get through that
door. I was out last night, and I'm going to get my bacon, if you lose
your mine.” He clapped Archie on the shoulder and pushed him along in
front of him. “Come ahead with me, and we'll talk business.”

Dr. Archie attended the Captain and waited while he gave his order,
taking the seat the old promoter indicated.

“Now, sir,” the Captain turned to him, “you don't want to sell anything.
You must be under the impression that I'm one of these damned New
England sharks that get their pound of flesh off the widow and orphan.
If you're a little short, sign a note and I'll write a check. That's the
way gentlemen do business. If you want to put up some San Felipe as
collateral, let her go, but I shan't touch a share of it. Pens and ink,
please, Oscar,”--he lifted a large forefinger to the Austrian.

The Captain took out his checkbook and a book of blank notes, and
adjusted his nose-nippers. He wrote a few words in one book and Archie
wrote a few in the other. Then they each tore across perforations and
exchanged slips of paper.

“That's the way. Saves office rent,” the Captain commented with
satisfaction, returning the books to his pocket. “And now, Archie, where
are you off to ?”

“Got to go East to-night. A deal waiting for me in New York.” Dr. Archie
rose.

The Captain's face brightened as he saw Oscar approaching with a tray,
and he began tucking the corner of his napkin inside his collar, over
his ascot. “Don't let them unload anything on you back there, doctor,”
 he said genially, “and don't let them relieve you of anything, either.
Don't let them get any Cripple stuff off you. We can manage our own
silver out here, and we're going to take it out by the ton, sir!”

The doctor left the dining-room, and after another consultation with the
clerk, he wrote his first telegram to Thea:--


Miss Thea Kronborg,
Everett House, New York.

Will call at your hotel eleven o'clock Friday morning. Glad to come.
Thank you.

ARCHIE


He stood and heard the message actually clicked off on the wire, with
the feeling that she was hearing the click at the other end. Then he sat
down in the lobby and wrote a note to his wife and one to the other
doctor in Moonstone. When he at last issued out into the storm, it was
with a feeling of elation rather than of anxiety. Whatever was wrong, he
could make it right. Her letter had practically said so.

He tramped about the snowy streets, from the bank to the Union Station,
where he shoved his money under the grating of the ticket window as if
he could not get rid of it fast enough. He had never been in New York,
never been farther east than Buffalo. “That's rather a shame,” he
reflected boyishly as he put the long tickets in his pocket, “for a man
nearly forty years old.” However, he thought as he walked up toward the
club, he was on the whole glad that his first trip had a human interest,
that he was going for something, and because he was wanted. He loved
holidays. He felt as if he were going to Germany himself. “Queer,”--he
went over it with the snow blowing in his face,--“but that sort of thing
is more interesting than mines and making your daily bread. It's worth
paying out to be in on it,--for a fellow like me. And when it's
Thea--Oh, I back her!” he laughed aloud as he burst in at the door of
the Athletic Club, powdered with snow.

Archie sat down before the New York papers and ran over the
advertisements of hotels, but he was too restless to read. Probably he
had better get a new overcoat, and he was not sure about the shape of
his collars. “I don't want to look different to her from everybody else
there,” he mused. “I guess I'll go down and have Van look me over. He'll
put me right.”

So he plunged out into the snow again and started for his tailor's. When
he passed a florist's shop he stopped and looked in at the window,
smiling; how naturally pleasant things recalled one another. At the
tailor's he kept whistling, “Flow gently, Sweet Afton,” while Van Dusen
advised him, until that resourceful tailor and haberdasher exclaimed,
“You must have a date back there, doctor; you behave like a bridegroom,”
 and made him remember that he wasn't one.

Before he let him go, Van put his finger on the Masonic pin in his
client's lapel. “Mustn't wear that, doctor. Very bad form back there.”




II

FRED OTTENBURG, smartly dressed for the afternoon, with a long black
coat and gaiters was sitting in the dusty parlor of the Everett House.
His manner was not in accord with his personal freshness, the good lines
of his clothes, and the shining smoothness of his hair. His attitude was
one of deep dejection, and his face, though it had the cool,
unimpeachable fairness possible only to a very blond young man, was by
no means happy. A page shuffled into the room and looked about. When he
made out the dark figure in a shadowy corner, tracing over the carpet
pattern with a cane, he droned, “The lady says you can come up, sir.”

Fred picked up his hat and gloves and followed the creature, who seemed
an aged boy in uniform, through dark corridors that smelled of old
carpets. The page knocked at the door of Thea's sitting-room, and then
wandered away. Thea came to the door with a telegram in her hand. She
asked Ottenburg to come in and pointed to one of the clumsy,
sullen-looking chairs that were as thick as they were high. The room was
brown with time, dark in spite of two windows that opened on Union
Square, with dull curtains and carpet, and heavy, respectable-looking
furniture in somber colors. The place was saved from utter dismalness by
a coal fire under the black marble mantelpiece,--brilliantly reflected
in a long mirror that hung between the two windows. This was the first
time Fred had seen the room, and he took it in quickly, as he put down
his hat and gloves.

Thea seated herself at the walnut writing-desk, still holding the slip
of yellow paper. “Dr. Archie is coming,” she said. “He will be here
Friday morning.”

“Well, that's good, at any rate,” her visitor replied with a determined
effort at cheerfulness. Then, turning to the fire, he added blankly, “If
you want him.”

“Of course I want him. I would never have asked such a thing of him if I
hadn't wanted him a great deal. It's a very expensive trip.” Thea spoke
severely. Then she went on, in a milder tone. “He doesn't say anything
about the money, but I think his coming means that he can let me have
it.”

Fred was standing before the mantel, rubbing his hands together
nervously. “Probably. You are still determined to call on him ?” He sat
down tentatively in the chair Thea had indicated. “I don't see why you
won't borrow from me, and let him sign with you, for instance. That
would constitute a perfectly regular business transaction. I could bring
suit against either of you for my money.”

Thea turned toward him from the desk. “We won't take that up again,
Fred. I should have a different feeling about it if I went on your
money. In a way I shall feel freer on Dr. Archie's, and in another way I
shall feel more bound. I shall try even harder.” She paused. “He is
almost like my father,” she added irrelevantly.

“Still, he isn't, you know,” Fred persisted. “It wouldn't be anything
new. I've loaned money to students before, and got it back, too.”

“Yes; I know you're generous,” Thea hurried over it, “but this will be
the best way. He will be here on Friday did I tell you ?”

“I think you mentioned it. That's rather soon. May I smoke ?” he took out
a small cigarette case. “I suppose you'll be off next week ?” he asked as
he struck a match.

“Just as soon as I can,” she replied with a restless movement of her
arms, as if her dark-blue dress were too tight for her. “It seems as if
I'd been here forever.”

“And yet,” the young man mused, “we got in only four days ago. Facts
really don't count for much, do they ? It's all in the way people feel:
even in little things.”

Thea winced, but she did not answer him. She put the telegram back in
its envelope and placed it carefully in one of the pigeonholes of the
desk.

“I suppose,” Fred brought out with effort, “that your friend is in your
confidence ?”

“He always has been. I shall have to tell him about myself. I wish I
could without dragging you in.”

Fred shook himself. “Don't bother about where you drag me, please,” he
put in, flushing. “I don't give--” he subsided suddenly.

“I'm afraid,” Thea went on gravely, “that he won't understand. He'll be
hard on you.”

Fred studied the white ash of his cigarette before he flicked it off.
“You mean he'll see me as even worse than I am. Yes, I suppose I shall
look very low to him: a fifthrate scoundrel. But that only matters in so
far as it hurts his feelings.”

Thea sighed. “We'll both look pretty low. And after all, we must really
be just about as we shall look to him.”

Ottenburg started up and threw his cigarette into the grate. “That I
deny. Have you ever been really frank with this preceptor of your
childhood, even when you WERE a child ? Think a minute, have you ? Of
course not! From your cradle, as I once told you, you've been 'doing it'
on the side, living your own life, admitting to yourself things that
would horrify him. You've always deceived him to the extent of letting
him think you different from what you are. He couldn't understand then,
he can't understand now. So why not spare yourself and him ?”

She shook her head. “Of course, I've had my own thoughts. Maybe he has
had his, too. But I've never done anything before that he would much
mind. I must put myself right with him,--as right as I can,--to begin
over. He'll make allowances for me. He always has. But I'm afraid he
won't for you.”

“Leave that to him and me. I take it you want me to see him ?” Fred sat
down again and began absently to trace the carpet pattern with his cane.
“At the worst,” he spoke wanderingly, “I thought you'd perhaps let me go
in on the business end of it and invest along with you. You'd put in
your talent and ambition and hard work, and I'd put in the money
and--well, nobody's good wishes are to be scorned, not even mine. Then,
when the thing panned out big, we could share together. Your doctor
friend hasn't cared half so much about your future as I have.”

“He's cared a good deal. He doesn't know as much about such things as
you do. Of course you've been a great deal more help to me than any one
else ever has,” Thea said quietly. The black clock on the mantel began
to strike. She listened to the five strokes and then said, “I'd have
liked your helping me eight months ago. But now, you'd simply be keeping
me.”

“You weren't ready for it eight months ago.” Fred leaned back at last in
his chair. “You simply weren't ready for it. You were too tired. You
were too timid. Your whole tone was too low. You couldn't rise from a
chair like that,”--she had started up apprehensively and gone toward the
window.--“You were fumbling and awkward. Since then you've come into
your personality. You were always locking horns with it before. You were
a sullen little drudge eight months ago, afraid of being caught at
either looking or moving like yourself. Nobody could tell anything about
you. A voice is not an instrument that's found ready-made. A voice is
personality. It can be as big as a circus and as common as
dirt.--There's good money in that kind, too, but I don't happen to be
interested in them.--Nobody could tell much about what you might be able
to do, last winter. I divined more than anybody else.”

“Yes, I know you did.” Thea walked over to the oldfashioned mantel and
held her hands down to the glow of the fire. “I owe so much to you, and
that's what makes things hard. That's why I have to get away from you
altogether. I depend on you for so many things. Oh, I did even last
winter, in Chicago!” She knelt down by the grate and held her hands
closer to the coals. “And one thing leads to another.”

Ottenburg watched her as she bent toward the fire. His glance brightened
a little. “Anyhow, you couldn't look as you do now, before you knew me.
You WERE clumsy. And whatever you do now, you do splendidly. And you
can't cry enough to spoil your face for more than ten minutes. It comes
right back, in spite of you. It's only since you've known me that you've
let yourself be beautiful.”

Without rising she turned her face away. Fred went on impetuously. “Oh,
you can turn it away from me, Thea; you can take it away from me! All
the same--” his spurt died and he fell back. “How can you turn on me so,
after all!” he sighed.

“I haven't. But when you arranged with yourself to take me in like that,
you couldn't have been thinking very kindly of me. I can't understand
how you carried it through, when I was so easy, and all the
circumstances were so easy.”

Her crouching position by the fire became threatening. Fred got up, and
Thea also rose.

“No,” he said, “I can't make you see that now. Some time later, perhaps,
you will understand better. For one thing, I honestly could not imagine
that words, names, meant so much to you.” Fred was talking with the
desperation of a man who has put himself in the wrong and who yet feels
that there was an idea of truth in his conduct. “Suppose that you had
married your brakeman and lived with him year after year, caring for him
even less than you do for your doctor, or for Harsanyi. I suppose you
would have felt quite all right about it, because that relation has a
name in good standing. To me, that seems--sickening!” He took a rapid
turn about the room and then as Thea remained standing, he rolled one of
the elephantine chairs up to the hearth for her.

“Sit down and listen to me for a moment, Thea.” He began pacing from the
hearthrug to the window and back again, while she sat down compliantly.
“Don't you know most of the people in the world are not individuals at
all ? They never have an individual idea or experience. A lot of girls go
to boarding-school together, come out the same season, dance at the same
parties, are married off in groups, have their babies at about the same
time, send their children to school together, and so the human crop
renews itself. Such women know as much about the reality of the forms
they go through as they know about the wars they learn the dates of.
They get their most personal experiences out of novels and plays.
Everything is second-hand with them. Why, you COULDN'T live like that.”

Thea sat looking toward the mantel, her eyes half closed, her chin
level, her head set as if she were enduring something. Her hands, very
white, lay passive on her dark gown. From the window corner Fred looked
at them and at her. He shook his head and flashed an angry, tormented
look out into the blue twilight over the Square, through which muffled
cries and calls and the clang of car bells came up from the street. He
turned again and began to pace the floor, his hands in his pockets.

“Say what you will, Thea Kronborg, you are not that sort of person. You
will never sit alone with a pacifier and a novel. You won't subsist on
what the old ladies have put into the bottle for you. You will always
break through into the realities. That was the first thing Harsanyi
found out about you; that you couldn't be kept on the outside. If you'd
lived in Moonstone all your life and got on with the discreet brakeman,
you'd have had just the same nature. Your children would have been the
realities then, probably. If they'd been commonplace, you'd have killed
them with driving. You'd have managed some way to live twenty times as
much as the people around you.”

Fred paused. He sought along the shadowy ceiling and heavy mouldings for
words. When he began again, his voice was lower, and at first he spoke
with less conviction, though again it grew on him. “Now I knew all
this--oh, knew it better than I can ever make you understand! You've
been running a handicap. You had no time to lose. I wanted you to have
what you need and to get on fast--get through with me, if need be; I
counted on that. You've no time to sit round and analyze your conduct or
your feelings. Other women give their whole lives to it. They've nothing
else to do. Helping a man to get his divorce is a career for them; just
the sort of intellectual exercise they like.”

Fred dived fiercely into his pockets as if he would rip them out and
scatter their contents to the winds. Stopping before her, he took a deep
breath and went on again, this time slowly. “All that sort of thing is
foreign to you. You'd be nowhere at it. You haven't that kind of mind.
The grammatical niceties of conduct are dark to you. You're simple--and
poetic.” Fred's voice seemed to be wandering about in the thickening
dusk. “You won't play much. You won't, perhaps, love many times.” He
paused. “And you did love me, you know. Your railroad friend would have
understood me. I COULD have thrown you back. The reverse was there,--it
stared me in the face,--but I couldn't pull it. I let you drive ahead.”
 He threw out his hands. What Thea noticed, oddly enough, was the flash
of the firelight on his cuff link. He turned again. “And you'll always
drive ahead,” he muttered. “It's your way.”

There was a long silence. Fred had dropped into a chair. He seemed,
after such an explosion, not to have a word left in him. Thea put her
hand to the back of her neck and pressed it, as if the muscles there
were aching.

“Well,” she said at last, “I at least overlook more in you than I do in
myself. I am always excusing you to myself. I don't do much else.”

“Then why, in Heaven's name, won't you let me be your friend ? You make a
scoundrel of me, borrowing money from another man to get out of my
clutches.”

“If I borrow from him, it's to study. Anything I took from you would be
different. As I said before, you'd be keeping me.”

“Keeping! I like your language. It's pure Moonstone, Thea,--like your
point of view. I wonder how long you'll be a Methodist.” He turned away
bitterly.

“Well, I've never said I wasn't Moonstone, have I ? I am, and that's why
I want Dr. Archie. I can't see anything so funny about Moonstone, you
know.” She pushed her chair back a little from the hearth and clasped
her hands over her knee, still looking thoughtfully into the red coals.
“We always come back to the same thing, Fred. The name, as you call it,
makes a difference to me how I feel about myself. You would have acted
very differently with a girl of your own kind, and that's why I can't
take anything from you now. You've made everything impossible. Being
married is one thing and not being married is the other thing, and
that's all there is to it. I can't see how you reasoned with yourself,
if you took the trouble to reason. You say I was too much alone, and yet
what you did was to cut me off more than I ever had been. Now I'm going
to try to make good to my friends out there. That's all there is left
for me.”

“Make good to your friends!” Fred burst out. “What one of them cares as
I care, or believes as I believe ? I've told you I'll never ask a
gracious word from you until I can ask it with all the churches in
Christendom at my back.”

Thea looked up, and when she saw Fred's face, she thought sadly that he,
too, looked as if things were spoiled for him. “If you know me as well
as you say you do, Fred,” she said slowly, “then you are not being
honest with yourself. You know that I can't do things halfway. If you
kept me at all--you'd keep me.” She dropped her head wearily on her hand
and sat with her forehead resting on her fingers.

Fred leaned over her and said just above his breath, “Then, when I get
that divorce, you'll take it up with me again ? You'll at least let me
know, warn me, before there is a serious question of anybody else ?”

Without lifting her head, Thea answered him. “Oh, I don't think there
will ever be a question of anybody else. Not if I can help it. I suppose
I've given you every reason to think there will be,--at once, on
shipboard, any time.”

Ottenburg drew himself up like a shot. “Stop it, Thea!” he said sharply.
“That's one thing you've never done. That's like any common woman.” He
saw her shoulders lift a little and grow calm. Then he went to the other
side of the room and took up his hat and gloves from the sofa. He came
back cheerfully. “I didn't drop in to bully you this afternoon. I came
to coax you to go out for tea with me somewhere.” He waited, but she did
not look up or lift her head, still sunk on her hand.

Her handkerchief had fallen. Fred picked it up and put it on her knee,
pressing her fingers over it. “Good-night, dear and wonderful,” he
whispered,--“wonderful and dear! How can you ever get away from me when
I will always follow you, through every wall, through every door,
wherever you go.” He looked down at her bent head, and the curve of her
neck that was so sad. He stooped, and with his lips just touched her
hair where the firelight made it ruddiest. “I didn't know I had it in
me, Thea. I thought it was all a fairy tale. I don't know myself any
more.” He closed his eyes and breathed deeply. “The salt's all gone out
of your hair. It's full of sun and wind again. I believe it has
memories.” Again she heard him take a deep breath. “I could do without
you for a lifetime, if that would give you to yourself. A woman like you
doesn't find herself, alone.”

She thrust her free hand up to him. He kissed it softly, as if she were
asleep and he were afraid of waking her.

From the door he turned back irrelevantly. “As to your old friend, Thea,
if he's to be here on Friday, why,”--he snatched out his watch and held
it down to catch the light from the grate,--“he's on the train now! That
ought to cheer you. Good-night.” She heard the door close.




III

ON Friday afternoon Thea Kronborg was walking excitedly up and down her
sitting-room, which at that hour was flooded by thin, clear sunshine.
Both windows were open, and the fire in the grate was low, for the day
was one of those false springs that sometimes blow into New York from
the sea in the middle of winter, soft, warm, with a persuasive salty
moisture in the air and a relaxing thaw under foot. Thea was flushed and
animated, and she seemed as restless as the sooty sparrows that chirped
and cheeped distractingly about the windows. She kept looking at the
black clock, and then down into the Square. The room was full of
flowers, and she stopped now and then to arrange them or to move them
into the sunlight. After the bellboy came to announce a visitor, she
took some Roman hyacinths from a glass and stuck them in the front of
her dark-blue dress.

When at last Fred Ottenburg appeared in the doorway, she met him with an
exclamation of pleasure. “I am glad you've come, Fred. I was afraid you
might not get my note, and I wanted to see you before you see Dr.
Archie. He's so nice!” She brought her hands together to emphasize her
statement.

“Is he ? I'm glad. You see I'm quite out of breath. I didn't wait for the
elevator, but ran upstairs. I was so pleased at being sent for.” He
dropped his hat and overcoat. “Yes, I should say he is nice! I don't
seem to recognize all of these,” waving his handkerchief about at the
flowers.

“Yes, he brought them himself, in a big box. He brought lots with him
besides flowers. Oh, lots of things! The old Moonstone feeling,”--Thea
moved her hand back and forth in the air, fluttering her fingers,--“the
feeling of starting out, early in the morning, to take my lesson.”

“And you've had everything out with him ?”

“No, I haven't.”

“Haven't ?” He looked up in consternation.

“No, I haven't!” Thea spoke excitedly, moving about over the sunny
patches on the grimy carpet. “I've lied to him, just as you said I had
always lied to him, and that's why I'm so happy. I've let him think what
he likes to think. Oh, I couldn't do anything else, Fred,”--she shook
her head emphatically. “If you'd seen him when he came in, so pleased
and excited! You see this is a great adventure for him. From the moment
I began to talk to him, he entreated me not to say too much, not to
spoil his notion of me. Not in so many words, of course. But if you'd
seen his eyes, his face, his kind hands! Oh, no! I couldn't.” She took a
deep breath, as if with a renewed sense of her narrow escape.

“Then, what did you tell him ?” Fred demanded.

Thea sat down on the edge of the sofa and began shutting and opening her
hands nervously. “Well, I told him enough, and not too much. I told him
all about how good you were to me last winter, getting me engagements
and things, and how you had helped me with my work more than anybody.
Then I told him about how you sent me down to the ranch when I had no
money or anything.” She paused and wrinkled her forehead. “And I told
him that I wanted to marry you and ran away to Mexico with you, and that
I was awfully happy until you told me that you couldn't marry me
because--well, I told him why.” Thea dropped her eyes and moved the toe
of her shoe about restlessly on the carpet.

“And he took it from you, like that ?” Fred asked, almost with awe.

“Yes, just like that, and asked no questions. He was hurt; he had some
wretched moments. I could see him squirming and squirming and trying to
get past it. He kept shutting his eyes and rubbing his forehead. But
when I told him that I absolutely knew you wanted to marry me, that you
would whenever you could, that seemed to help him a good deal.”

“And that satisfied him ?” Fred asked wonderingly. He could not quite
imagine what kind of person Dr. Archie might be.

“He took me by the shoulders once and asked, oh, in such a frightened
way, 'Thea, was he GOOD to you, this young man ?' When I told him you
were, he looked at me again: 'And you care for him a great deal, you
believe in him ?' Then he seemed satisfied.” Thea paused. “You see, he's
just tremendously good, and tremendously afraid of things--of some
things. Otherwise he would have got rid of Mrs. Archie.” She looked up
suddenly: “You were right, though; one can't tell people about things
they don't know already.”

Fred stood in the window, his back to the sunlight, fingering the
jonquils. “Yes, you can, my dear. But you must tell it in such a way
that they don't know you're telling it, and that they don't know they're
hearing it.”

Thea smiled past him, out into the air. “I see. It's a secret. Like the
sound in the shell.”

“What's that ?” Fred was watching her and thinking how moving that
faraway expression, in her, happened to be. “What did you say ?”

She came back. “Oh, something old and Moonstony! I have almost forgotten
it myself. But I feel better than I thought I ever could again. I can't
wait to be off. Oh, Fred,” she sprang up, “I want to get at it!”

As she broke out with this, she threw up her head and lifted herself a
little on her toes. Fred colored and looked at her fearfully,
hesitatingly. Her eyes, which looked out through the window, were
bright--they had no memories. No, she did not remember. That momentary
elevation had no associations for her. It was unconscious.

He looked her up and down and laughed and shook his head. “You are just
all I want you to be--and that is,--not for me! Don't worry, you'll get
at it. You are at it. My God! have you ever, for one moment, been at
anything else ?”

Thea did not answer him, and clearly she had not heard him. She was
watching something out in the thin light of the false spring and its
treacherously soft air.

Fred waited a moment. “Are you going to dine with your friend to-night ?”

“Yes. He has never been in New York before. He wants to go about. Where
shall I tell him to go ?”

“Wouldn't it be a better plan, since you wish me to meet him, for you
both to dine with me ? It would seem only natural and friendly. You'll
have to live up a little to his notion of us.” Thea seemed to consider
the suggestion favorably. “If you wish him to be easy in his mind,” Fred
went on, “that would help. I think, myself, that we are rather nice
together. Put on one of the new dresses you got down there, and let him
see how lovely you can be. You owe him some pleasure, after all the
trouble he has taken.”

Thea laughed, and seemed to find the idea exciting and pleasant. “Oh,
very well! I'll do my best. Only don't wear a dress coat, please. He
hasn't one, and he's nervous about it.”

Fred looked at his watch. “Your monument up there is fast. I'll be here
with a cab at eight. I'm anxious to meet him. You've given me the
strangest idea of his callow innocence and aged indifference.”

She shook her head. “No, he's none of that. He's very good, and he won't
admit things. I love him for it. Now, as I look back on it, I see that
I've always, even when I was little, shielded him.”

As she laughed, Fred caught the bright spark in her eye that he knew so
well, and held it for a happy instant. Then he blew her a kiss with his
finger-tips and fled.




IV

AT nine o'clock that evening our three friends were seated in the
balcony of a French restaurant, much gayer and more intimate than any
that exists in New York to-day. This old restaurant was built by a lover
of pleasure, who knew that to dine gayly human beings must have the
reassurance of certain limitations of space and of a certain definite
style; that the walls must be near enough to suggest shelter, the
ceiling high enough to give the chandeliers a setting. The place was
crowded with the kind of people who dine late and well, and Dr. Archie,
as he watched the animated groups in the long room below the balcony,
found this much the most festive scene he had ever looked out upon. He
said to himself, in a jovial mood somewhat sustained by the cheer of the
board, that this evening alone was worth his long journey. He followed
attentively the orchestra, ensconced at the farther end of the balcony,
and told Thea it made him feel “quite musical” to recognize “The
Invitation to the Dance” or “The Blue Danube,” and that he could
remember just what kind of day it was when he heard her practicing them
at home, and lingered at the gate to listen.

For the first few moments, when he was introduced to young Ottenburg in
the parlor of the Everett House, the doctor had been awkward and
unbending. But Fred, as his father had often observed, “was not a good
mixer for nothing.” He had brought Dr. Archie around during the short
cab ride, and in an hour they had become old friends.

From the moment when the doctor lifted his glass and, looking
consciously at Thea, said, “To your success,” Fred liked him. He felt
his quality; understood his courage in some directions and what Thea
called his timidity in others, his unspent and miraculously preserved
youthfulness. Men could never impose upon the doctor, he guessed, but
women always could. Fred liked, too, the doctor's manner with Thea, his
bashful admiration and the little hesitancy by which he betrayed his
consciousness of the change in her. It was just this change that, at
present, interested Fred more than anything else. That, he felt, was his
“created value,” and it was his best chance for any peace of mind. If
that were not real, obvious to an old friend like Archie, then he cut a
very poor figure, indeed.

Fred got a good deal, too, out of their talk about Moonstone. From her
questions and the doctor's answers he was able to form some conception
of the little world that was almost the measure of Thea's experience,
the one bit of the human drama that she had followed with sympathy and
understanding. As the two ran over the list of their friends, the mere
sound of a name seemed to recall volumes to each of them, to indicate
mines of knowledge and observation they had in common. At some names
they laughed delightedly, at some indulgently and even tenderly.

“You two young people must come out to Moonstone when Thea gets back,”
 the doctor said hospitably.

“Oh, we shall!” Fred caught it up. “I'm keen to know all these people.
It is very tantalizing to hear only their names.”

“Would they interest an outsider very much, do you think, Dr. Archie ?”
 Thea leaned toward him. “Isn't it only because we've known them since I
was little ?”

The doctor glanced at her deferentially. Fred had noticed that he seemed
a little afraid to look at her squarely--perhaps a trifle embarrassed by
a mode of dress to which he was unaccustomed. “Well, you are practically
an outsider yourself, Thea, now,” he observed smiling. “Oh, I know,” he
went on quickly in response to her gesture of protest,--“I know you
don't change toward your old friends, but you can see us all from a
distance now. It's all to your advantage that you can still take your
old interest, isn't it, Mr. Ottenburg ?”

“That's exactly one of her advantages, Dr. Archie. Nobody can ever take
that away from her, and none of us who came later can ever hope to rival
Moonstone in the impression we make. Her scale of values will always be
the Moonstone scale. And, with an artist, that IS an advantage.” Fred
nodded.

Dr. Archie looked at him seriously. “You mean it keeps them from getting
affected ?”

“Yes; keeps them from getting off the track generally.”

While the waiter filled the glasses, Fred pointed out to Thea a big
black French barytone who was eating anchovies by their tails at one of
the tables below, and the doctor looked about and studied his fellow
diners.

“Do you know, Mr. Ottenburg,” he said deeply, “these people all look
happier to me than our Western people do. Is it simply good manners on
their part, or do they get more out of life ?”

Fred laughed to Thea above the glass he had just lifted. “Some of them
are getting a good deal out of it now, doctor. This is the hour when
bench-joy brightens.”

Thea chuckled and darted him a quick glance. “Benchjoy! Where did you
get that slang ?”

“That happens to be very old slang, my dear. Older than Moonstone or the
sovereign State of Colorado. Our old friend Mr. Nathanmeyer could tell
us why it happens to hit you.” He leaned forward and touched Thea's
wrist, “See that fur coat just coming in, Thea. It's D'Albert. He's just
back from his Western tour. Fine head, hasn't he ?”

“To go back,” said Dr. Archie; “I insist that people do look happier
here. I've noticed it even on the street, and especially in the hotels.”

Fred turned to him cheerfully. “New York people live a good deal in the
fourth dimension, Dr. Archie. It's that you notice in their faces.”

The doctor was interested. “The fourth dimension,” he repeated slowly;
“and is that slang, too ?”

“No,”--Fred shook his head,--“that's merely a figure. I mean that life
is not quite so personal here as it is in your part of the world. People
are more taken up by hobbies, interests that are less subject to
reverses than their personal affairs. If you're interested in Thea's
voice, for instance, or in voices in general, that interest is just the
same, even if your mining stocks go down.”

The doctor looked at him narrowly. “You think that's about the principal
difference between country people and city people, don't you ?”

Fred was a little disconcerted at being followed up so resolutely, and
he attempted to dismiss it with a pleasantry. “I've never thought much
about it, doctor. But I should say, on the spur of the moment, that that
is one of the principal differences between people anywhere. It's the
consolation of fellows like me who don't accomplish much. The fourth
dimension is not good for business, but we think we have a better time.”

Dr. Archie leaned back in his chair. His heavy shoulders were
contemplative. “And she,” he said slowly; “should you say that she is
one of the kind you refer to ?” He inclined his head toward the shimmer
of the pale-green dress beside him. Thea was leaning, just then, over
the balcony rail, her head in the light from the chandeliers below.

“Never, never!” Fred protested. “She's as hard-headed as the worst of
you--with a difference.”

The doctor sighed. “Yes, with a difference; something that makes a good
many revolutions to the second. When she was little I used to feel her
head to try to locate it.”

Fred laughed. “Did you, though ? So you were on the track of it ? Oh, it's
there! We can't get round it, miss,” as Thea looked back inquiringly.
“Dr. Archie, there's a fellow townsman of yours I feel a real kinship
for.” He pressed a cigar upon Dr. Archie and struck a match for him.
“Tell me about Spanish Johnny.”

The doctor smiled benignantly through the first waves of smoke. “Well,
Johnny's an old patient of mine, and he's an old admirer of Thea's. She
was born a cosmopolitan, and I expect she learned a good deal from
Johnny when she used to run away and go to Mexican Town. We thought it a
queer freak then.”

The doctor launched into a long story, in which he was often eagerly
interrupted or joyously confirmed by Thea, who was drinking her coffee
and forcing open the petals of the roses with an ardent and rather rude
hand. Fred settled down into enjoying his comprehension of his guests.
Thea, watching Dr. Archie and interested in his presentation, was
unconsciously impersonating her suave, gold-tinted friend. It was
delightful to see her so radiant and responsive again. She had kept her
promise about looking her best; when one could so easily get together
the colors of an apple branch in early spring, that was not hard to do.
Even Dr. Archie felt, each time he looked at her, a fresh consciousness.
He recognized the fine texture of her mother's skin, with the difference
that, when she reached across the table to give him a bunch of grapes,
her arm was not only white, but somehow a little dazzling. She seemed to
him taller, and freer in all her movements. She had now a way of taking
a deep breath when she was interested, that made her seem very strong,
somehow, and brought her at one quite overpoweringly. If he seemed shy,
it was not that he was intimidated by her worldly clothes, but that her
greater positiveness, her whole augmented self, made him feel that his
accustomed manner toward her was inadequate.

Fred, on his part, was reflecting that the awkward position in which he
had placed her would not confine or chafe her long. She looked about at
other people, at other women, curiously. She was not quite sure of
herself, but she was not in the least afraid or apologetic. She seemed
to sit there on the edge, emerging from one world into another, taking
her bearings, getting an idea of the concerted movement about her, but
with absolute self-confidence. So far from shrinking, she expanded. The
mere kindly effort to please Dr. Archie was enough to bring her out.

There was much talk of aurae at that time, and Fred mused that every
beautiful, every compellingly beautiful woman, had an aura, whether
other people did or no. There was, certainly, about the woman he had
brought up from Mexico, such an emanation. She existed in more space
than she occupied by measurement. The enveloping air about her head and
shoulders was subsidized--was more moving than she herself, for in it
lived the awakenings, all the first sweetness that life kills in people.
One felt in her such a wealth of JUGENDZEIT, all those flowers of the
mind and the blood that bloom and perish by the myriad in the few
exhaustless years when the imagination first kindles. It was in watching
her as she emerged like this, in being near and not too near, that one
got, for a moment, so much that one had lost; among other legendary
things the legendary theme of the absolutely magical power of a
beautiful woman.

After they had left Thea at her hotel, Dr. Archie admitted to Fred, as
they walked up Broadway through the rapidly chilling air, that once
before he had seen their young friend flash up into a more potent self,
but in a darker mood. It was in his office one night, when she was at
home the summer before last. “And then I got the idea,” he added simply,
“that she would not live like other people: that, for better or worse,
she had uncommon gifts.”

“Oh, we'll see that it's for better, you and I,” Fred reassured him.
“Won't you come up to my hotel with me ? I think we ought to have a long
talk.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Dr. Archie gratefully; “I think we ought.”




V

THEA was to sail on Tuesday, at noon, and on Saturday Fred Ottenburg
arranged for her passage, while she and Dr. Archie went shopping. With
rugs and sea-clothes she was already provided; Fred had got everything
of that sort she needed for the voyage up from Vera Cruz. On Sunday
afternoon Thea went to see the Harsanyis. When she returned to her
hotel, she found a note from Ottenburg, saying that he had called and
would come again to-morrow.

On Monday morning, while she was at breakfast, Fred came in. She knew by
his hurried, distracted air as he entered the dining-room that something
had gone wrong. He had just got a telegram from home. His mother had
been thrown from her carriage and hurt; a concussion of some sort, and
she was unconscious. He was leaving for St. Louis that night on the
eleven o'clock train. He had a great deal to attend to during the day.
He would come that evening, if he might, and stay with her until train
time, while she was doing her packing. Scarcely waiting for her consent,
he hurried away.

All day Thea was somewhat cast down. She was sorry for Fred, and she
missed the feeling that she was the one person in his mind. He had
scarcely looked at her when they exchanged words at the breakfast-table.
She felt as if she were set aside, and she did not seem so important
even to herself as she had yesterday. Certainly, she reflected, it was
high time that she began to take care of herself again. Dr. Archie came
for dinner, but she sent him away early, telling him that she would be
ready to go to the boat with him at half-past ten the next morning. When
she went upstairs, she looked gloomily at the open trunk in her
sitting-room, and at the trays piled on the sofa. She stood at the
window and watched a quiet snowstorm spending itself over the city. More
than anything else, falling snow always made her think of Moonstone; of
the Kohlers' garden, of Thor's sled, of dressing by lamplight and
starting off to school before the paths were broken.

When Fred came, he looked tired, and he took her hand almost without
seeing her.

“I'm so sorry, Fred. Have you had any more word ?”

“She was still unconscious at four this afternoon. It doesn't look very
encouraging.” He approached the fire and warmed his hands. He seemed to
have contracted, and he had not at all his habitual ease of manner.
“Poor mother!” he exclaimed; “nothing like this should have happened to
her. She has so much pride of person. She's not at all an old woman, you
know. She's never got beyond vigorous and rather dashing middle age.” He
turned abruptly to Thea and for the first time really looked at her.
“How badly things come out! She'd have liked you for a daughter-in-law.
Oh, you'd have fought like the devil, but you'd have respected each
other.” He sank into a chair and thrust his feet out to the fire.
“Still,” he went on thoughtfully, seeming to address the ceiling, “it
might have been bad for you. Our big German houses, our good German
cooking--you might have got lost in the upholstery. That substantial
comfort might take the temper out of you, dull your edge. Yes,” he
sighed, “I guess you were meant for the jolt of the breakers.”

“I guess I'll get plenty of jolt,” Thea murmured, turning to her trunk.

“I'm rather glad I'm not staying over until to-morrow,” Fred reflected.
“I think it's easier for me to glide out like this. I feel now as if
everything were rather casual, anyhow. A thing like that dulls one's
feelings.”

Thea, standing by her trunk, made no reply. Presently he shook himself
and rose. “Want me to put those trays in for you ?”

“No, thank you. I'm not ready for them yet.”

Fred strolled over to the sofa, lifted a scarf from one of the trays and
stood abstractedly drawing it through his fingers. “You've been so kind
these last few days, Thea, that I began to hope you might soften a
little; that you might ask me to come over and see you this summer.”

“If you thought that, you were mistaken,” she said slowly. “I've
hardened, if anything. But I shan't carry any grudge away with me, if
you mean that.”

He dropped the scarf. “And there's nothing--nothing at all you'll let me
do ?”

“Yes, there is one thing, and it's a good deal to ask. If I get knocked
out, or never get on, I'd like you to see that Dr. Archie gets his money
back. I'm taking three thousand dollars of his.”

“Why, of course I shall. You may dismiss that from your mind. How fussy
you are about money, Thea. You make such a point of it.” He turned
sharply and walked to the windows.

Thea sat down in the chair he had quitted. “It's only poor people who
feel that way about money, and who are really honest,” she said gravely.
“Sometimes I think that to be really honest, you must have been so poor
that you've been tempted to steal.”

“To what ?”

“To steal. I used to be, when I first went to Chicago and saw all the
things in the big stores there. Never anything big, but little things,
the kind I'd never seen before and could never afford. I did take
something once, before I knew it.”

Fred came toward her. For the first time she had his whole attention, in
the degree to which she was accustomed to having it. “Did you ? What was
it ?” he asked with interest.

“A sachet. A little blue silk bag of orris-root powder. There was a
whole counterful of them, marked down to fifty cents. I'd never seen any
before, and they seemed irresistible. I took one up and wandered about
the store with it. Nobody seemed to notice, so I carried it off.”

Fred laughed. “Crazy child! Why, your things always smell of orris; is
it a penance ?”

“No, I love it. But I saw that the firm didn't lose anything by me. I
went back and bought it there whenever I had a quarter to spend. I got a
lot to take to Arizona. I made it up to them.”

“I'll bet you did!” Fred took her hand. “Why didn't I find you that
first winter ? I'd have loved you just as you came!”

Thea shook her head. “No, you wouldn't, but you might have found me
amusing. The Harsanyis said yesterday afternoon that I wore such a funny
cape and that my shoes always squeaked. They think I've improved. I told
them it was your doing if I had, and then they looked scared.”

“Did you sing for Harsanyi ?”

“Yes. He thinks I've improved there, too. He said nice things to me. Oh,
he was very nice! He agrees with you about my going to Lehmann, if
she'll take me. He came out to the elevator with me, after we had said
good-bye. He said something nice out there, too, but he seemed sad.”

“What was it that he said ?”

“He said, 'When people, serious people, believe in you, they give you
some of their best, so--take care of it, Miss Kronborg.' Then he waved
his hands and went back.”

“If you sang, I wish you had taken me along. Did you sing well ?” Fred
turned from her and went back to the window. “I wonder when I shall hear
you sing again.” He picked up a bunch of violets and smelled them. “You
know, your leaving me like this--well, it's almost inhuman to be able to
do it so kindly and unconditionally.”

“I suppose it is. It was almost inhuman to be able to leave home,
too,--the last time, when I knew it was for good. But all the same, I
cared a great deal more than anybody else did. I lived through it. I
have no choice now. No matter how much it breaks me up, I have to go. Do
I seem to enjoy it ?”

Fred bent over her trunk and picked up something which proved to be a
score, clumsily bound. “What's this ? Did you ever try to sing this ?” He
opened it and on the engraved title-page read Wunsch's inscription,
“EINST, O WUNDER!” He looked up sharply at Thea.

“Wunsch gave me that when he went away. I've told you about him, my old
teacher in Moonstone. He loved that opera.”

Fred went toward the fireplace, the book under his arm, singing
softly:--


“EINST, O WUNDER, ENTBLUHT AUF MEINEM GRABE,
EINE BLUME DER ASCHE MEINES HERZENS;”

“You have no idea at all where he is, Thea ?” He leaned against the
mantel and looked down at her.

“No, I wish I had. He may be dead by this time. That was five years ago,
and he used himself hard. Mrs. Kohler was always afraid he would die off
alone somewhere and be stuck under the prairie. When we last heard of
him, he was in Kansas.”

“If he were to be found, I'd like to do something for him. I seem to get
a good deal of him from this.” He opened the book again, where he kept
the place with his finger, and scrutinized the purple ink. “How like a
German! Had he ever sung the song for you ?”

“No. I didn't know where the words were from until once, when Harsanyi
sang it for me, I recognized them.”

Fred closed the book. “Let me see, what was your noble brakeman's name ?”

Thea looked up with surprise. “Ray, Ray Kennedy.”

“Ray Kennedy!” he laughed. “It couldn't well have been better! Wunsch
and Dr. Archie, and Ray, and I,”--he told them off on his
fingers,--“your whistling-posts! You haven't done so badly. We've backed
you as we could, some in our weakness and some in our might. In your
dark hours--and you'll have them--you may like to remember us.” He
smiled whimsically and dropped the score into the trunk. “You are taking
that with you ?”

“Surely I am. I haven't so many keepsakes that I can afford to leave
that. I haven't got many that I value so highly.”

“That you value so highly ?” Fred echoed her gravity playfully. “You are
delicious when you fall into your vernacular.” He laughed half to
himself.

“What's the matter with that ? Isn't it perfectly good English ?”

“Perfectly good Moonstone, my dear. Like the readymade clothes that hang
in the windows, made to fit everybody and fit nobody, a phrase that can
be used on all occasions. Oh,”--he started across the room
again,--“that's one of the fine things about your going! You'll be with
the right sort of people and you'll learn a good, live, warm German,
that will be like yourself. You'll get a new speech full of shades and
color like your voice; alive, like your mind. It will be almost like
being born again, Thea.”

She was not offended. Fred had said such things to her before, and she
wanted to learn. In the natural course of things she would never have
loved a man from whom she could not learn a great deal.

“Harsanyi said once,” she remarked thoughtfully, “that if one became an
artist one had to be born again, and that one owed nothing to anybody.”

“Exactly. And when I see you again I shall not see you, but your
daughter. May I ?” He held up his cigarette case questioningly and then
began to smoke, taking up again the song which ran in his head:--


“DEUTLICH SCHIMMERT AUF JEDEM, PURPURBLATTCHEN, ADELAIDE!”


“I have half an hour with you yet, and then, exit Fred.” He walked about
the room, smoking and singing the words under his breath. “You'll like
the voyage,” he said abruptly. “That first approach to a foreign shore,
stealing up on it and finding it--there's nothing like it. It wakes up
everything that's asleep in you. You won't mind my writing to some
people in Berlin ? They'll be nice to you.”

“I wish you would.” Thea gave a deep sigh. “I wish one could look ahead
and see what is coming to one.”

“Oh, no!” Fred was smoking nervously; “that would never do. It's the
uncertainty that makes one try. You've never had any sort of chance, and
now I fancy you'll make it up to yourself. You'll find the way to let
yourself out in one long flight.”

Thea put her hand on her heart. “And then drop like the rocks we used to
throw--anywhere.” She left the chair and went over to the sofa, hunting
for something in the trunk trays. When she came back she found Fred
sitting in her place. “Here are some handkerchiefs of yours. I've kept
one or two. They're larger than mine and useful if one has a headache.”

“Thank you. How nicely they smell of your things!” He looked at the
white squares for a moment and then put them in his pocket. He kept the
low chair, and as she stood beside him he took her hands and sat looking
intently at them, as if he were examining them for some special purpose,
tracing the long round fingers with the tips of his own. “Ordinarily,
you know, there are reefs that a man catches to and keeps his nose above
water. But this is a case by itself. There seems to be no limit as to
how much I can be in love with you. I keep going.” He did not lift his
eyes from her fingers, which he continued to study with the same fervor.
“Every kind of stringed instrument there is plays in your hands, Thea,”
 he whispered, pressing them to his face.

She dropped beside him and slipped into his arms, shutting her eyes and
lifting her cheek to his. “Tell me one thing,” Fred whispered. “You said
that night on the boat, when I first told you, that if you could you
would crush it all up in your hands and throw it into the sea. Would
you, all those weeks ?”

She shook her head.

“Answer me, would you ?”

“No, I was angry then. I'm not now. I'd never give them up. Don't make
me pay too much.” In that embrace they lived over again all the others.
When Thea drew away from him, she dropped her face in her hands. “You
are good to me,” she breathed, “you are!”

Rising to his feet, he put his hands under her elbows and lifted her
gently. He drew her toward the door with him. “Get all you can. Be
generous with yourself. Don't stop short of splendid things. I want them
for you more than I want anything else, more than I want one splendid
thing for myself. I can't help feeling that you'll gain, somehow, by my
losing so much. That you'll gain the very thing I lose. Take care of
her, as Harsanyi said. She's wonderful!” He kissed her and went out of
the door without looking back, just as if he were coming again
to-morrow.

Thea went quickly into her bedroom. She brought out an armful of muslin
things, knelt down, and began to lay them in the trays. Suddenly she
stopped, dropped forward and leaned against the open trunk, her head on
her arms. The tears fell down on the dark old carpet. It came over her
how many people must have said good-bye and been unhappy in that room.
Other people, before her time, had hired this room to cry in. Strange
rooms and strange streets and faces, how sick at heart they made one!
Why was she going so far, when what she wanted was some familiar place
to hide in ?--the rock house, her little room in Moonstone, her own bed.
Oh, how good it would be to lie down in that little bed, to cut the
nerve that kept one struggling, that pulled one on and on, to sink into
peace there, with all the family safe and happy downstairs. After all,
she was a Moonstone girl, one of the preacher's children. Everything
else was in Fred's imagination. Why was she called upon to take such
chances ? Any safe, humdrum work that did not compromise her would be
better. But if she failed now, she would lose her soul. There was
nowhere to fall, after one took that step, except into abysses of
wretchedness. She knew what abysses, for she could still hear the old
man playing in the snowstorm, it was released in her like a passion of
longing. Every nerve in her body thrilled to it. It brought her to her
feet, carried her somehow to bed and into troubled sleep.

That night she taught in Moonstone again: she beat her pupils in hideous
rages, she kept on beating them. She sang at funerals, and struggled at
the piano with Harsanyi. In one dream she was looking into a hand-glass
and thinking that she was getting better-looking, when the glass began
to grow smaller and smaller and her own reflection to shrink, until she
realized that she was looking into Ray Kennedy's eyes, seeing her face
in that look of his which she could never forget. All at once the eyes
were Fred Ottenburg's, and not Ray's. All night she heard the shrieking
of trains, whistling in and out of Moonstone, as she used to hear them
in her sleep when they blew shrill in the winter air. But to-night they
were terrifying,--the spectral, fated trains that “raced with death,”
 about which the old woman from the depot used to pray.

In the morning she wakened breathless after a struggle with Mrs. Livery
Johnson's daughter. She started up with a bound, threw the blankets back
and sat on the edge of the bed, her night-dress open, her long braids
hanging over her bosom, blinking at the daylight. After all, it was not
too late. She was only twenty years old, and the boat sailed at noon.
There was still time!





PART VI. KRONBORG




I

It is a glorious winter day. Denver, standing on her high plateau under
a thrilling green-blue sky, is masked in snow and glittering with
sunlight. The Capitol building is actually in armor, and throws off the
shafts of the sun until the beholder is dazzled and the outlines of the
building are lost in a blaze of reflected light. The stone terrace is a
white field over which fiery reflections dance, and the trees and bushes
are faithfully repeated in snow--on every black twig a soft, blurred
line of white. From the terrace one looks directly over to where the
mountains break in their sharp, familiar lines against the sky. Snow
fills the gorges, hangs in scarfs on the great slopes, and on the peaks
the fiery sunshine is gathered up as by a burning-glass.

Howard Archie is standing at the window of his private room in the
offices of the San Felipe Mining Company, on the sixth floor of the
Raton Building, looking off at the mountain glories of his State while
he gives dictation to his secretary. He is ten years older than when we
saw him last, and emphatically ten years more prosperous. A decade of
coming into things has not so much aged him as it has fortified,
smoothed, and assured him. His sandy hair and imperial conceal whatever
gray they harbor. He has not grown heavier, but more flexible, and his
massive shoulders carry fifty years and the control of his great mining
interests more lightly than they carried forty years and a country
practice. In short, he is one of the friends to whom we feel grateful
for having got on in the world, for helping to keep up the general
temperature and our own confidence in life. He is an acquaintance that
one would hurry to overtake and greet among a hundred. In his warm
handshake and generous smile there is the stimulating cordiality of good
fellows come into good fortune and eager to pass it on; something that
makes one think better of the lottery of life and resolve to try again.

When Archie had finished his morning mail, he turned away from the
window and faced his secretary. “Did anything come up yesterday
afternoon while I was away, T. B. ?”

Thomas Burk turned over the leaf of his calendar. “Governor Alden sent
down to say that he wanted to see you before he sends his letter to the
Board of Pardons. Asked if you could go over to the State House this
morning.”

Archie shrugged his shoulders. “I'll think about it.”

The young man grinned.

“Anything else ?” his chief continued.

T. B. swung round in his chair with a look of interest on his shrewd,
clean-shaven face. “Old Jasper Flight was in, Dr. Archie. I never
expected to see him alive again. Seems he's tucked away for the winter
with a sister who's a housekeeper at the Oxford. He's all crippled up
with rheumatism, but as fierce after it as ever. Wants to know if you or
the company won't grub-stake him again. Says he's sure of it this time;
had located something when the snow shut down on him in December. He
wants to crawl out at the first break in the weather, with that same old
burro with the split ear. He got somebody to winter the beast for him.
He's superstitious about that burro, too; thinks it's divinely guided.
You ought to hear the line of talk he put up here yesterday; said when
he rode in his carriage, that burro was a-going to ride along with him.”

Archie laughed. “Did he leave you his address ?”

“He didn't neglect anything,” replied the clerk cynically.

“Well, send him a line and tell him to come in again. I like to hear
him. Of all the crazy prospectors I've ever known, he's the most
interesting, because he's really crazy. It's a religious conviction with
him, and with most of 'em it's a gambling fever or pure vagrancy. But
Jasper Flight believes that the Almighty keeps the secret of the silver
deposits in these hills, and gives it away to the deserving. He's a
downright noble figure. Of course I'll stake him! As long as he can
crawl out in the spring. He and that burro are a sight together. The
beast is nearly as white as Jasper; must be twenty years old.”

“If you stake him this time, you won't have to again,” said T. B.
knowingly. “He'll croak up there, mark my word. Says he never ties the
burro at night now, for fear he might be called sudden, and the beast
would starve. I guess that animal could eat a lariat rope, all right,
and enjoy it.”

“I guess if we knew the things those two have eaten, and haven't eaten,
in their time, T. B., it would make us vegetarians.” The doctor sat down
and looked thoughtful. “That's the way for the old man to go. It would
be pretty hard luck if he had to die in a hospital. I wish he could turn
up something before he cashes in. But his kind seldom do; they're
bewitched. Still, there was Stratton. I've been meeting Jasper Flight,
and his side meat and tin pans, up in the mountains for years, and I'd
miss him. I always halfway believe the fairy tales he spins me. Old
Jasper Flight,” Archie murmured, as if he liked the name or the picture
it called up.

A clerk came in from the outer office and handed Archie a card. He
sprang up and exclaimed, “Mr. Ottenburg ? Bring him in.”

Fred Ottenburg entered, clad in a long, fur-lined coat, holding a
checked-cloth hat in his hand, his cheeks and eyes bright with the
outdoor cold. The two men met before Archie's desk and their handclasp
was longer than friendship prompts except in regions where the blood
warms and quickens to meet the dry cold. Under the general keyingup of
the altitude, manners take on a heartiness, a vivacity, that is one
expression of the half-unconscious excitement which Colorado people miss
when they drop into lower strata of air. The heart, we are told, wears
out early in that high atmosphere, but while it pumps it sends out no
sluggish stream. Our two friends stood gripping each other by the hand
and smiling.

“When did you get in, Fred ? And what have you come for ?” Archie gave him
a quizzical glance.

“I've come to find out what you think you're doing out here,” the
younger man declared emphatically. “I want to get next, I do. When can
you see me ?”

“Anything on to-night ? Then suppose you dine with me. Where can I pick
you up at five-thirty ?”

“Bixby's office, general freight agent of the Burlington.” Ottenburg
began to button his overcoat and drew on his gloves. “I've got to have
one shot at you before I go, Archie. Didn't I tell you Pinky Alden was a
cheap squirt ?”

Alden's backer laughed and shook his head. “Oh, he's worse than that,
Fred. It isn't polite to mention what he is, outside of the Arabian
Nights. I guessed you'd come to rub it into me.”

Ottenburg paused, his hand on the doorknob, his high color challenging
the doctor's calm. “I'm disgusted with you, Archie, for training with
such a pup. A man of your experience!”

“Well, he's been an experience,” Archie muttered. “I'm not coy about
admitting it, am I ?”

Ottenburg flung open the door. “Small credit to you. Even the women are
out for capital and corruption, I hear. Your Governor's done more for
the United Breweries in six months than I've been able to do in six
years. He's the lily-livered sort we're looking for. Good-morning.”

That afternoon at five o'clock Dr. Archie emerged from the State House
after his talk with Governor Alden, and crossed the terrace under a
saffron sky. The snow, beaten hard, was blue in the dusk; a day of
blinding sunlight had not even started a thaw. The lights of the city
twinkled pale below him in the quivering violet air, and the dome of the
State House behind him was still red with the light from the west.
Before he got into his car, the doctor paused to look about him at the
scene of which he never tired. Archie lived in his own house on Colfax
Avenue, where he had roomy grounds and a rose garden and a conservatory.
His housekeeping was done by three Japanese boys, devoted and
resourceful, who were able to manage Archie's dinner parties, to see
that he kept his engagements, and to make visitors who stayed at the
house so comfortable that they were always loath to go away.

Archie had never known what comfort was until he became a widower,
though with characteristic delicacy, or dishonesty, he insisted upon
accrediting his peace of mind to the San Felipe, to Time, to anything
but his release from Mrs. Archie.

Mrs. Archie died just before her husband left Moonstone and came to
Denver to live, six years ago. The poor woman's fight against dust was
her undoing at last. One summer day when she was rubbing the parlor
upholstery with gasoline,--the doctor had often forbidden her to use it
on any account, so that was one of the pleasures she seized upon in his
absence,--an explosion occurred. Nobody ever knew exactly how it
happened, for Mrs. Archie was dead when the neighbors rushed in to save
her from the burning house. She must have inhaled the burning gas and
died instantly.

Moonstone severity relented toward her somewhat after her death. But
even while her old cronies at Mrs. Smiley's millinery store said that it
was a terrible thing, they added that nothing but a powerful explosive
COULD have killed Mrs. Archie, and that it was only right the doctor
should have a chance.

Archie's past was literally destroyed when his wife died. The house
burned to the ground, and all those material reminders which have such
power over people disappeared in an hour. His mining interests now took
him to Denver so often that it seemed better to make his headquarters
there. He gave up his practice and left Moonstone for good. Six months
afterward, while Dr. Archie was living at the Brown Palace Hotel, the
San Felipe mine began to give up that silver hoard which old Captain
Harris had always accused it of concealing, and San Felipe headed the
list of mining quotations in every daily paper, East and West. In a few
years Dr. Archie was a very rich man. His mine was such an important
item in the mineral output of the State, and Archie had a hand in so
many of the new industries of Colorado and New Mexico, that his
political influence was considerable. He had thrown it all, two years
ago, to the new reform party, and had brought about the election of a
governor of whose conduct he was now heartily ashamed. His friends
believed that Archie himself had ambitious political plans.




II

WHEN Ottenburg and his host reached the house on Colfax Avenue, they
went directly to the library, a long double room on the second floor
which Archie had arranged exactly to his own taste. It was full of books
and mounted specimens of wild game, with a big writing-table at either
end, stiff, old-fashioned engravings, heavy hangings and deep
upholstery.

When one of the Japanese boys brought the cocktails, Fred turned from
the fine specimen of peccoray he had been examining and said, “A man is
an owl to live in such a place alone, Archie. Why don't you marry ? As
for me, just because I can't marry, I find the world full of charming,
unattached women, any one of whom I could fit up a house for with
alacrity.”

“You're more knowing than I.” Archie spoke politely. “I'm not very wide
awake about women. I'd be likely to pick out one of the uncomfortable
ones--and there are a few of them, you know.” He drank his cocktail and
rubbed his hands together in a friendly way. “My friends here have
charming wives, and they don't give me a chance to get lonely. They are
very kind to me, and I have a great many pleasant friendships.”

Fred put down his glass. “Yes, I've always noticed that women have
confidence in you. You have the doctor's way of getting next. And you
enjoy that kind of thing ?”

“The friendship of attractive women ? Oh, dear, yes! I depend upon it a
great deal.”

The butler announced dinner, and the two men went downstairs to the
dining-room. Dr. Archie's dinners were always good and well served, and
his wines were excellent.

“I saw the Fuel and Iron people to-day,” Ottenburg said, looking up from
his soup. “Their heart is in the right place. I can't see why in the
mischief you ever got mixed up with that reform gang, Archie. You've got
nothing to reform out here. The situation has always been as simple as
two and two in Colorado; mostly a matter of a friendly understanding.”

“Well,”--Archie spoke tolerantly,--“some of the young fellows seemed to
have red-hot convictions, and I thought it was better to let them try
their ideas out.”

Ottenburg shrugged his shoulders. “A few dull young men who haven't
ability enough to play the old game the old way, so they want to put on
a new game which doesn't take so much brains and gives away more
advertising that's what your anti-saloon league and vice commission
amounts to. They provide notoriety for the fellows who can't distinguish
themselves at running a business or practicing law or developing an
industry. Here you have a mediocre lawyer with no brains and no
practice, trying to get a look-in on something. He comes up with the
novel proposition that the prostitute has a hard time of it, puts his
picture in the paper, and the first thing you know, he's a celebrity. He
gets the rake-off and she's just where she was before. How could you
fall for a mouse-trap like Pink Alden, Archie ?”

Dr. Archie laughed as he began to carve. “Pink seems to get under your
skin. He's not worth talking about. He's gone his limit. People won't
read about his blameless life any more. I knew those interviews he gave
out would cook him. They were a last resort. I could have stopped him,
but by that time I'd come to the conclusion that I'd let the reformers
down. I'm not against a general shaking-up, but the trouble with Pinky's
crowd is they never get beyond a general writing-up. We gave them a
chance to do something, and they just kept on writing about each other
and what temptations they had overcome.”

While Archie and his friend were busy with Colorado politics, the
impeccable Japanese attended swiftly and intelligently to his duties,
and the dinner, as Ottenburg at last remarked, was worthy of more
profitable conversation.

“So it is,” the doctor admitted. “Well, we'll go upstairs for our coffee
and cut this out. Bring up some cognac and arak, Tai,” he added as he
rose from the table.

They stopped to examine a moose's head on the stairway, and when they
reached the library the pine logs in the fireplace had been lighted, and
the coffee was bubbling before the hearth. Tai placed two chairs before
the fire and brought a tray of cigarettes.

“Bring the cigars in my lower desk drawer, boy,” the doctor directed.
“Too much light in here, isn't there, Fred ? Light the lamp there on my
desk, Tai.” He turned off the electric glare and settled himself deep
into the chair opposite Ottenburg's.

“To go back to our conversation, doctor,” Fred began while he waited for
the first steam to blow off his coffee; “why don't you make up your mind
to go to Washington ? There'd be no fight made against you. I needn't say
the United Breweries would back you. There'd be some KUDOS coming to us,
too; backing a reform candidate.”

Dr. Archie measured his length in his chair and thrust his large boots
toward the crackling pitch-pine. He drank his coffee and lit a big black
cigar while his guest looked over the assortment of cigarettes on the
tray. “You say why don't I,” the doctor spoke with the deliberation of a
man in the position of having several courses to choose from, “but, on
the other hand, why should I ?” He puffed away and seemed, through his
half-closed eyes, to look down several long roads with the intention of
luxuriously rejecting all of them and remaining where he was. “I'm sick
of politics. I'm disillusioned about serving my crowd, and I don't
particularly want to serve yours. Nothing in it that I particularly
want; and a man's not effective in politics unless he wants something
for himself, and wants it hard. I can reach my ends by straighter roads.
There are plenty of things to keep me busy. We haven't begun to develop
our resources in this State; we haven't had a look in on them yet.
That's the only thing that isn't fake--making men and machines go, and
actually turning out a product.”

The doctor poured himself some white cordial and looked over the little
glass into the fire with an expression which led Ottenburg to believe
that he was getting at something in his own mind. Fred lit a cigarette
and let his friend grope for his idea.

“My boys, here,” Archie went on, “have got me rather interested in
Japan. Think I'll go out there in the spring, and come back the other
way, through Siberia. I've always wanted to go to Russia.” His eyes
still hunted for something in his big fireplace. With a slow turn of his
head he brought them back to his guest and fixed them upon him. “Just
now, I'm thinking of running on to New York for a few weeks,” he ended
abruptly.

Ottenburg lifted his chin. “Ah!” he exclaimed, as if he began to see
Archie's drift. “Shall you see Thea ?”

“Yes.” The doctor replenished his cordial glass. “In fact, I suspect I
am going exactly TO see her. I'm getting stale on things here, Fred.
Best people in the world and always doing things for me. I'm fond of
them, too, but I've been with them too much. I'm getting ill-tempered,
and the first thing I know I'll be hurting people's feelings. I snapped
Mrs. Dandridge up over the telephone this afternoon when she asked me to
go out to Colorado Springs on Sunday to meet some English people who are
staying at the Antlers. Very nice of her to want me, and I was as sour
as if she'd been trying to work me for something. I've got to get out
for a while, to save my reputation.”

To this explanation Ottenburg had not paid much attention. He seemed to
be looking at a fixed point: the yellow glass eyes of a fine wildcat
over one of the bookcases. “You've never heard her at all, have you ?” he
asked reflectively. “Curious, when this is her second season in New
York.”

“I was going on last March. Had everything arranged. And then old Cap
Harris thought he could drive his car and me through a lamp-post and I
was laid up with a compound fracture for two months. So I didn't get to
see Thea.”

Ottenburg studied the red end of his cigarette attentively. “She might
have come out to see you. I remember you covered the distance like a
streak when she wanted you.”

Archie moved uneasily. “Oh, she couldn't do that. She had to get back to
Vienna to work on some new parts for this year. She sailed two days
after the New York season closed.”

“Well, then she couldn't, of course.” Fred smoked his cigarette close
and tossed the end into the fire. “I'm tremendously glad you're going
now. If you're stale, she'll jack you up. That's one of her specialties.
She got a rise out of me last December that lasted me all winter.”

“Of course,” the doctor apologized, “you know so much more about such
things. I'm afraid it will be rather wasted on me. I'm no judge of
music.”

“Never mind that.” The younger man pulled himself up in his chair. “She
gets it across to people who aren't judges. That's just what she does.”
 He relapsed into his former lassitude. “If you were stone deaf, it
wouldn't all be wasted. It's a great deal to watch her. Incidentally,
you know, she is very beautiful. Photographs give you no idea.”

Dr. Archie clasped his large hands under his chin. “Oh, I'm counting on
that. I don't suppose her voice will sound natural to me. Probably I
wouldn't know it.”

Ottenburg smiled. “You'll know it, if you ever knew it. It's the same
voice, only more so. You'll know it.”

“Did you, in Germany that time, when you wrote me ? Seven years ago, now.
That must have been at the very beginning.”

“Yes, somewhere near the beginning. She sang one of the Rhine
daughters.” Fred paused and drew himself up again. “Sure, I knew it from
the first note. I'd heard a good many young voices come up out of the
Rhine, but, by gracious, I hadn't heard one like that!” He fumbled for
another cigarette. “Mahler was conducting that night. I met him as he
was leaving the house and had a word with him. 'Interesting voice you
tried out this evening,' I said. He stopped and smiled. 'Miss Kronborg,
you mean ? Yes, very. She seems to sing for the idea. Unusual in a young
singer.' I'd never heard him admit before that a singer could have an
idea. She not only had it, but she got it across. The Rhine music, that
I'd known since I was a boy, was fresh to me, vocalized for the first
time. You realized that she was beginning that long story, adequately,
with the end in view. Every phrase she sang was basic. She simply WAS
the idea of the Rhine music.” Ottenburg rose and stood with his back to
the fire. “And at the end, where you don't see the maidens at all, the
same thing again: two pretty voices AND the Rhine voice.” Fred snapped
his fingers and dropped his hand.

The doctor looked up at him enviously. “You see, all that would be lost
on me,” he said modestly. “I don't know the dream nor the interpretation
thereof. I'm out of it. It's too bad that so few of her old friends can
appreciate her.”

“Take a try at it,” Fred encouraged him. “You'll get in deeper than you
can explain to yourself. People with no personal interest do that.”

“I suppose,” said Archie diffidently, “that college German, gone to
seed, wouldn't help me out much. I used to be able to make my German
patients understand me.”

“Sure it would!” cried Ottenburg heartily. “Don't be above knowing your
libretto. That's all very well for musicians, but common mortals like
you and me have got to know what she's singing about. Get out your
dictionary and go at it as you would at any other proposition. Her
diction is beautiful, and if you know the text you'll get a great deal.
So long as you're going to hear her, get all that's coming to you. You
bet in Germany people know their librettos by heart! You Americans are
so afraid of stooping to learn anything.”

“I AM a little ashamed,” Archie admitted. “I guess that's the way we
mask our general ignorance. However, I'll stoop this time; I'm more
ashamed not to be able to follow her. The papers always say she's such a
fine actress.” He took up the tongs and began to rearrange the logs that
had burned through and fallen apart. “I suppose she has changed a great
deal ?” he asked absently.

“We've all changed, my dear Archie,--she more than most of us. Yes, and
no. She's all there, only there's a great deal more of her. I've had
only a few words with her in several years. It's better not, when I'm
tied up this way. The laws are barbarous, Archie.”

“Your wife is--still the same ?” the doctor asked sympathetically.

“Absolutely. Hasn't been out of a sanitarium for seven years now. No
prospect of her ever being out, and as long as she's there I'm tied hand
and foot. What does society get out of such a state of things, I'd like
to know, except a tangle of irregularities ? If you want to reform,
there's an opening for you!”

“It's bad, oh, very bad; I agree with you!” Dr. Archie shook his head.
“But there would be complications under another system, too. The whole
question of a young man's marrying has looked pretty grave to me for a
long while. How have they the courage to keep on doing it ? It depresses
me now to buy wedding presents.” For some time the doctor watched his
guest, who was sunk in bitter reflections. “Such things used to go
better than they do now, I believe. Seems to me all the married people I
knew when I was a boy were happy enough.” He paused again and bit the
end off a fresh cigar. “You never saw Thea's mother, did you, Ottenburg ?
That's a pity. Mrs. Kronborg was a fine woman. I've always been afraid
Thea made a mistake, not coming home when Mrs. Kronborg was ill, no
matter what it cost her.”

Ottenburg moved about restlessly. “She couldn't, Archie, she positively
couldn't. I felt you never understood that, but I was in Dresden at the
time, and though I wasn't seeing much of her, I could size up the
situation for myself. It was by just a lucky chance that she got to sing
ELIZABETH that time at the Dresden Opera, a complication of
circumstances. If she'd run away, for any reason, she might have waited
years for such a chance to come again. She gave a wonderful performance
and made a great impression. They offered her certain terms; she had to
take them and follow it up then and there. In that game you can't lose a
single trick. She was ill herself, but she sang. Her mother was ill, and
she sang. No, you mustn't hold that against her, Archie. She did the
right thing there.” Ottenburg drew out his watch. “Hello! I must be
traveling. You hear from her regularly ?”

“More or less regularly. She was never much of a letter-writer. She tells
me about her engagements and contracts, but I know so little about that
business that it doesn't mean much to me beyond the figures, which seem
very impressive. We've had a good deal of business correspondence, about
putting up a stone to her father and mother, and, lately, about her
youngest brother, Thor. He is with me now; he drives my car. To-day he's
up at the mine.”

Ottenburg, who had picked up his overcoat, dropped it. “Drives your
car ?” he asked incredulously.

“Yes. Thea and I have had a good deal of bother about Thor. We tried a
business college, and an engineering school, but it was no good. Thor
was born a chauffeur before there were cars to drive. He was never good
for anything else; lay around home and collected postage stamps and took
bicycles to pieces, waiting for the automobile to be invented. He's just
as much a part of a car as the steering-gear. I can't find out whether
he likes his job with me or not, or whether he feels any curiosity about
his sister. You can't find anything out from a Kronborg nowadays. The
mother was different.”

Fred plunged into his coat. “Well, it's a queer world, Archie. But
you'll think better of it, if you go to New York. Wish I were going with
you. I'll drop in on you in the morning at about eleven. I want a word
with you about this Interstate Commerce Bill. Good-night.”

Dr. Archie saw his guest to the motor which was waiting below, and then
went back to his library, where he replenished the fire and sat down for
a long smoke. A man of Archie's modest and rather credulous nature
develops late, and makes his largest gain between forty and fifty. At
thirty, indeed, as we have seen, Archie was a soft-hearted boy under a
manly exterior, still whistling to keep up his courage. Prosperity and
large responsibilities--above all, getting free of poor Mrs. Archie--had
brought out a good deal more than he knew was in him. He was thinking
tonight as he sat before the fire, in the comfort he liked so well, that
but for lucky chances, and lucky holes in the ground, he would still be
a country practitioner, reading his old books by his office lamp. And
yet, he was not so fresh and energetic as he ought to be. He was tired
of business and of politics. Worse than that, he was tired of the men
with whom he had to do and of the women who, as he said, had been kind
to him. He felt as if he were still hunting for something, like old
Jasper Flight. He knew that this was an unbecoming and ungrateful state
of mind, and he reproached himself for it. But he could not help
wondering why it was that life, even when it gave so much, after all
gave so little. What was it that he had expected and missed ? Why was he,
more than he was anything else, disappointed ?

He fell to looking back over his life and asking himself which years of
it he would like to live over again,--just as they had been,--and they
were not many. His college years he would live again, gladly. After them
there was nothing he would care to repeat until he came to Thea
Kronborg. There had been something stirring about those years in
Moonstone, when he was a restless young man on the verge of breaking
into larger enterprises, and when she was a restless child on the verge
of growing up into something unknown. He realized now that she had
counted for a great deal more to him than he knew at the time. It was a
continuous sort of relationship. He was always on the lookout for her as
he went about the town, always vaguely expecting her as he sat in his
office at night. He had never asked himself then if it was strange that
he should find a child of twelve the most interesting and companionable
person in Moonstone. It had seemed a pleasant, natural kind of
solicitude. He explained it then by the fact that he had no children of
his own. But now, as he looked back at those years, the other interests
were faded and inanimate. The thought of them was heavy. But wherever
his life had touched Thea Kronborg's, there was still a little warmth
left, a little sparkle. Their friendship seemed to run over those
discontented years like a leafy pattern, still bright and fresh when the
other patterns had faded into the dull background. Their walks and
drives and confidences, the night they watched the rabbit in the
moonlight,--why were these things stirring to remember ? Whenever he
thought of them, they were distinctly different from the other memories
of his life; always seemed humorous, gay, with a little thrill of
anticipation and mystery about them. They came nearer to being tender
secrets than any others he possessed. Nearer than anything else they
corresponded to what he had hoped to find in the world, and had not
found. It came over him now that the unexpected favors of fortune, no
matter how dazzling, do not mean very much to us. They may excite or
divert us for a time, but when we look back, the only things we cherish
are those which in some way met our original want; the desire which
formed in us in early youth, undirected, and of its own accord.




III

FOR the first four years after Thea went to Germany things went on as
usual with the Kronborg family. Mrs. Kronborg's land in Nebraska
increased in value and brought her in a good rental. The family drifted
into an easier way of living, half without realizing it, as families
will. Then Mr. Kronborg, who had never been ill, died suddenly of cancer
of the liver, and after his death Mrs. Kronborg went, as her neighbors
said, into a decline. Hearing discouraging reports of her from the
physician who had taken over his practice, Dr. Archie went up from
Denver to see her. He found her in bed, in the room where he had more
than once attended her, a handsome woman of sixty with a body still firm
and white, her hair, faded now to a very pale primrose, in two thick
braids down her back, her eyes clear and calm. When the doctor arrived,
she was sitting up in her bed, knitting. He felt at once how glad she
was to see him, but he soon gathered that she had made no determination
to get well. She told him, indeed, that she could not very well get
along without Mr. Kronborg. The doctor looked at her with astonishment.
Was it possible that she could miss the foolish old man so much ? He
reminded her of her children.

“Yes,” she replied; “the children are all very well, but they are not
father. We were married young.”

The doctor watched her wonderingly as she went on knitting, thinking how
much she looked like Thea. The difference was one of degree rather than
of kind. The daughter had a compelling enthusiasm, the mother had none.
But their framework, their foundation, was very much the same.

In a moment Mrs. Kronborg spoke again. “Have you heard anything from
Thea lately ?”

During his talk with her, the doctor gathered that what Mrs. Kronborg
really wanted was to see her daughter Thea. Lying there day after day,
she wanted it calmly and continuously. He told her that, since she felt
so, he thought they might ask Thea to come home.

“I've thought a good deal about it,” said Mrs. Kronborg slowly. “I hate
to interrupt her, now that she's begun to get advancement. I expect
she's seen some pretty hard times, though she was never one to complain.
Perhaps she'd feel that she would like to come. It would be hard, losing
both of us while she's off there.”

When Dr. Archie got back to Denver he wrote a long letter to Thea,
explaining her mother's condition and how much she wished to see her,
and asking Thea to come, if only for a few weeks. Thea had repaid the
money she had borrowed from him, and he assured her that if she happened
to be short of funds for the journey, she had only to cable him.

A month later he got a frantic sort of reply from Thea. Complications in
the opera at Dresden had given her an unhoped-for opportunity to go on
in a big part. Before this letter reached the doctor, she would have
made her debut as ELIZABETH, in “Tannhauser.” She wanted to go to her
mother more than she wanted anything else in the world, but, unless she
failed,--which she would not,--she absolutely could not leave Dresden
for six months. It was not that she chose to stay; she had to stay--or
lose everything. The next few months would put her five years ahead, or
would put her back so far that it would be of no use to struggle
further. As soon as she was free, she would go to Moonstone and take her
mother back to Germany with her. Her mother, she was sure, could live
for years yet, and she would like German people and German ways, and
could be hearing music all the time. Thea said she was writing her
mother and begging her to help her one last time; to get strength and to
wait for her six months, and then she (Thea) would do everything. Her
mother would never have to make an effort again.

Dr. Archie went up to Moonstone at once. He had great confidence in Mrs.
Kronborg's power of will, and if Thea's appeal took hold of her enough,
he believed she might get better. But when he was shown into the
familiar room off the parlor, his heart sank. Mrs. Kronborg was lying
serene and fateful on her pillows. On the dresser at the foot of her bed
there was a large photograph of Thea in the character in which she was
to make her debut. Mrs. Kronborg pointed to it.

“Isn't she lovely, doctor ? It's nice that she hasn't changed much. I've
seen her look like that many a time.”

They talked for a while about Thea's good fortune. Mrs. Kronborg had had
a cablegram saying, “First performance well received. Great relief.” In
her letter Thea said; “If you'll only get better, dear mother, there's
nothing I can't do. I will make a really great success, if you'll try
with me. You shall have everything you want, and we will always be
together. I have a little house all picked out where we are to live.”

“Bringing up a family is not all it's cracked up to be,” said Mrs.
Kronborg with a flicker of irony, as she tucked the letter back under
her pillow. “The children you don't especially need, you have always
with you, like the poor. But the bright ones get away from you. They
have their own way to make in the world. Seems like the brighter they
are, the farther they go. I used to feel sorry that you had no family,
doctor, but maybe you're as well off.”

“Thea's plan seems sound to me, Mrs. Kronborg. There's no reason I can
see why you shouldn't pull up and live for years yet, under proper care.
You'd have the best doctors in the world over there, and it would be
wonderful to live with anybody who looks like that.” He nodded at the
photograph of the young woman who must have been singing “DICH, THEURE
HALLE, GRUSS' ICH WIEDER,” her eyes looking up, her beautiful hands
outspread with pleasure.

Mrs. Kronborg laughed quite cheerfully. “Yes, wouldn't it ? If father
were here, I might rouse myself. But sometimes it's hard to come back.
Or if she were in trouble, maybe I could rouse myself.”

“But, dear Mrs. Kronborg, she is in trouble,” her old friend
expostulated. “As she says, she's never needed you as she needs you now.
I make my guess that she's never begged anybody to help her before.”

Mrs. Kronborg smiled. “Yes, it's pretty of her. But that will pass. When
these things happen far away they don't make such a mark; especially if
your hands are full and you've duties of your own to think about. My own
father died in Nebraska when Gunner was born,--we were living in Iowa
then,--and I was sorry, but the baby made it up to me. I was father's
favorite, too. That's the way it goes, you see.”

The doctor took out Thea's letter to him, and read it over to Mrs.
Kronborg. She seemed to listen, and not to listen.

When he finished, she said thoughtfully: “I'd counted on hearing her
sing again. But I always took my pleasures as they come. I always
enjoyed her singing when she was here about the house. While she was
practicing I often used to leave my work and sit down in a rocker and
give myself up to it, the same as if I'd been at an entertainment. I was
never one of these housekeepers that let their work drive them to death.
And when she had the Mexicans over here, I always took it in. First and
last,”--she glanced judicially at the photograph,--“I guess I got about
as much out of Thea's voice as anybody will ever get.”

“I guess you did!” the doctor assented heartily; “and I got a good deal
myself. You remember how she used to sing those Scotch songs for me, and
lead us with her head, her hair bobbing ?”

“'Flow Gently, Sweet Afton,'--I can hear it now,” said Mrs. Kronborg;
“and poor father never knew when he sang sharp! He used to say, 'Mother,
how do you always know when they make mistakes practicing ?'” Mrs.
Kronborg chuckled.

Dr. Archie took her hand, still firm like the hand of a young woman. “It
was lucky for her that you did know. I always thought she got more from
you than from any of her teachers.”

“Except Wunsch; he was a real musician,” said Mrs. Kronborg
respectfully. “I gave her what chance I could, in a crowded house. I
kept the other children out of the parlor for her. That was about all I
could do. If she wasn't disturbed, she needed no watching. She went
after it like a terrier after rats from the first, poor child. She was
downright afraid of it. That's why I always encouraged her taking Thor
off to outlandish places. When she was out of the house, then she was
rid of it.”

After they had recalled many pleasant memories together, Mrs. Kronborg
said suddenly: “I always understood about her going off without coming
to see us that time. Oh, I know! You had to keep your own counsel. You
were a good friend to her. I've never forgot that.” She patted the
doctor's sleeve and went on absently. “There was something she didn't
want to tell me, and that's why she didn't come. Something happened when
she was with those people in Mexico. I worried for a good while, but I
guess she's come out of it all right. She'd had a pretty hard time,
scratching along alone like that when she was so young, and my farms in
Nebraska were down so low that I couldn't help her none. That's no way
to send a girl out. But I guess, whatever there was, she wouldn't be
afraid to tell me now.” Mrs. Kronborg looked up at the photograph with a
smile. “She doesn't look like she was beholding to anybody, does she ?”

“She isn't, Mrs. Kronborg. She never has been. That was why she borrowed
the money from me.”

“Oh, I knew she'd never have sent for you if she'd done anything to
shame us. She was always proud.” Mrs. Kronborg paused and turned a
little on her side. “It's been quite a satisfaction to you and me,
doctor, having her voice turn out so fine. The things you hope for don't
always turn out like that, by a long sight. As long as old Mrs. Kohler
lived, she used always to translate what it said about Thea in the
German papers she sent. I could make some of it out myself,--it's not
very different from Swedish,--but it pleased the old lady. She left Thea
her piece-picture of the burning of Moscow. I've got it put away in
moth-balls for her, along with the oboe her grandfather brought from
Sweden. I want her to take father's oboe back there some day.” Mrs.
Kronborg paused a moment and compressed her lips. “But I guess she'll
take a finer instrument than that with her, back to Sweden!” she added.

Her tone fairly startled the doctor, it was so vibrating with a fierce,
defiant kind of pride he had heard often in Thea's voice. He looked down
wonderingly at his old friend and patient. After all, one never knew
people to the core. Did she, within her, hide some of that still passion
of which her daughter was all-compact ?

“That last summer at home wasn't very nice for her,” Mrs. Kronborg began
as placidly as if the fire had never leaped up in her. “The other
children were acting-up because they thought I might make a fuss over
her and give her the big-head. We gave her the dare, somehow, the lot of
us, because we couldn't understand her changing teachers and all that.
That's the trouble about giving the dare to them quiet, unboastful
children; you never know how far it'll take 'em. Well, we ought not to
complain, doctor; she's given us a good deal to think about.”


The next time Dr. Archie came to Moonstone, he came to be a pall-bearer
at Mrs. Kronborg's funeral. When he last looked at her, she was so
serene and queenly that he went back to Denver feeling almost as if he
had helped to bury Thea Kronborg herself. The handsome head in the
coffin seemed to him much more really Thea than did the radiant young
woman in the picture, looking about at the Gothic vaultings and greeting
the Hall of Song.




IV

ONE bright morning late in February Dr. Archie was breakfasting
comfortably at the Waldorf. He had got into Jersey City on an early
train, and a red, windy sunrise over the North River had given him a
good appetite. He consulted the morning paper while he drank his coffee
and saw that “Lohengrin” was to be sung at the opera that evening. In
the list of the artists who would appear was the name “Kronborg.” Such
abruptness rather startled him. “Kronborg”: it was impressive and yet,
somehow, disrespectful; somewhat rude and brazen, on the back page of
the morning paper. After breakfast he went to the hotel ticket office
and asked the girl if she could give him something for “Lohengrin,”
 “near the front.” His manner was a trifle awkward and he wondered
whether the girl noticed it. Even if she did, of course, she could
scarcely suspect. Before the ticket stand he saw a bunch of blue posters
announcing the opera casts for the week. There was “Lohengrin,” and
under it he saw:--


ELSA VON BRABANT...Thea Kronborg.


That looked better. The girl gave him a ticket for a seat which she said
was excellent. He paid for it and went out to the cabstand. He mentioned
to the driver a number on Riverside Drive and got into a taxi. It would
not, of course, be the right thing to call upon Thea when she was going
to sing in the evening. He knew that much, thank goodness! Fred
Ottenburg had hinted to him that, more than almost anything else, that
would put one in wrong.

When he reached the number to which he directed his letters, he
dismissed the cab and got out for a walk. The house in which Thea lived
was as impersonal as the Waldorf, and quite as large. It was above 116th
Street, where the Drive narrows, and in front of it the shelving bank
dropped to the North River. As Archie strolled about the paths which
traversed this slope, below the street level, the fourteen stories of
the apartment hotel rose above him like a perpendicular cliff. He had no
idea on which floor Thea lived, but he reflected, as his eye ran over
the many windows, that the outlook would be fine from any floor. The
forbidding hugeness of the house made him feel as if he had expected to
meet Thea in a crowd and had missed her. He did not really believe that
she was hidden away behind any of those glittering windows, or that he
was to hear her this evening. His walk was curiously uninspiring and
unsuggestive. Presently remembering that Ottenburg had encouraged him to
study his lesson, he went down to the opera house and bought a libretto.
He had even brought his old “Adler's German and English” in his trunk,
and after luncheon he settled down in his gilded suite at the Waldorf
with a big cigar and the text of “Lohengrin.”

The opera was announced for seven-forty-five, but at half-past seven
Archie took his seat in the right front of the orchestra circle. He had
never been inside the Metropolitan Opera House before, and the height of
the audience room, the rich color, and the sweep of the balconies were
not without their effect upon him. He watched the house fill with a
growing feeling of expectation. When the steel curtain rose and the men
of the orchestra took their places, he felt distinctly nervous. The
burst of applause which greeted the conductor keyed him still higher. He
found that he had taken off his gloves and twisted them to a string.
When the lights went down and the violins began the overture, the place
looked larger than ever; a great pit, shadowy and solemn. The whole
atmosphere, he reflected, was somehow more serious than he had
anticipated.

After the curtains were drawn back upon the scene beside the Scheldt, he
got readily into the swing of the story. He was so much interested in
the bass who sang KING HENRY that he had almost forgotten for what he
was waiting so nervously, when the HERALD began in stentorian tones to
summon ELSA VON BRABANT. Then he began to realize that he was rather
frightened. There was a flutter of white at the back of the stage, and
women began to come in: two, four, six, eight, but not the right one. It
flashed across him that this was something like buck-fever, the
paralyzing moment that comes upon a man when his first elk looks at him
through the bushes, under its great antlers; the moment when a man's
mind is so full of shooting that he forgets the gun in his hand until
the buck nods adieu to him from a distant hill.

All at once, before the buck had left him, she was there. Yes,
unquestionably it was she. Her eyes were downcast, but the head, the
cheeks, the chin--there could be no mistake; she advanced slowly, as if
she were walking in her sleep. Some one spoke to her; she only inclined
her head. He spoke again, and she bowed her head still lower. Archie had
forgotten his libretto, and he had not counted upon these long pauses.
He had expected her to appear and sing and reassure him. They seemed to
be waiting for her. Did she ever forget ? Why in thunder didn't she--She
made a sound, a faint one. The people on the stage whispered together
and seemed confounded. His nervousness was absurd. She must have done
this often before; she knew her bearings. She made another sound, but he
could make nothing of it. Then the King sang to her, and Archie began to
remember where they were in the story. She came to the front of the
stage, lifted her eyes for the first time, clasped her hands and began,
“EINSAM IN TRUBEN TAGEN.”

Yes, it was exactly like buck-fever. Her face was there, toward the
house now, before his eyes, and he positively could not see it. She was
singing, at last, and he positively could not hear her. He was conscious
of nothing but an uncomfortable dread and a sense of crushing
disappointment. He had, after all, missed her. Whatever was there, she
was not there--for him.

The King interrupted her. She began again, “IN LICHTER WAFFEN SCHEINE.”
 Archie did not know when his buckfever passed, but presently he found
that he was sitting quietly in a darkened house, not listening to but
dreaming upon a river of silver sound. He felt apart from the others,
drifting alone on the melody, as if he had been alone with it for a long
while and had known it all before. His power of attention was not great
just then, but in so far as it went he seemed to be looking through an
exalted calmness at a beautiful woman from far away, from another sort
of life and feeling and understanding than his own, who had in her face
something he had known long ago, much brightened and beautified. As a
lad he used to believe that the faces of people who died were like that
in the next world; the same faces, but shining with the light of a new
understanding. No, Ottenburg had not prepared him!

What he felt was admiration and estrangement. The homely reunion, that
he had somehow expected, now seemed foolish. Instead of feeling proud
that he knew her better than all these people about him, he felt
chagrined at his own ingenuousness. For he did not know her better. This
woman he had never known; she had somehow devoured his little friend, as
the wolf ate up Red Ridinghood. Beautiful, radiant, tender as she was,
she chilled his old affection; that sort of feeling was not appropriate.
She seemed much, much farther away from him than she had seemed all
those years when she was in Germany. The ocean he could cross, but there
was something here he could not cross. There was a moment, when she
turned to the King and smiled that rare, sunrise smile of her childhood,
when he thought she was coming back to him. After the HERALD'S second
call for her champion, when she knelt in her impassioned prayer, there
was again something familiar, a kind of wild wonder that she had had the
power to call up long ago. But she merely reminded him of Thea; this was
not the girl herself.

After the tenor came on, the doctor ceased trying to make the woman
before him fit into any of his cherished recollections. He took her, in
so far as he could, for what she was then and there. When the knight
raised the kneeling girl and put his mailed hand on her hair, when she
lifted to him a face full of worship and passionate humility, Archie
gave up his last reservation. He knew no more about her than did the
hundreds around him, who sat in the shadow and looked on, as he looked,
some with more understanding, some with less. He knew as much about
ORTRUDE or LOHENGRIN as he knew about ELSA--more, because she went
further than they, she sustained the legendary beauty of her conception
more consistently. Even he could see that. Attitudes, movements, her
face, her white arms and fingers, everything was suffused with a rosy
tenderness, a warm humility, a gracious and yet--to him--wholly
estranging beauty.

During the balcony singing in the second act the doctor's thoughts were
as far away from Moonstone as the singer's doubtless were. He had begun,
indeed, to feel the exhilaration of getting free from personalities, of
being released from his own past as well as from Thea Kronborg's. It was
very much, he told himself, like a military funeral, exalting and
impersonal. Something old died in one, and out of it something new was
born. During the duet with ORTRUDE, and the splendors of the wedding
processional, this new feeling grew and grew. At the end of the act
there were many curtain calls and ELSA acknowledged them, brilliant,
gracious, spirited, with her far-breaking smile; but on the whole she
was harder and more self-contained before the curtain than she was in
the scene behind it. Archie did his part in the applause that greeted
her, but it was the new and wonderful he applauded, not the old and
dear. His personal, proprietary pride in her was frozen out.

He walked about the house during the ENTR'ACTE, and here and there among
the people in the foyer he caught the name “Kronborg.” On the staircase,
in front of the coffeeroom, a long-haired youth with a fat face was
discoursing to a group of old women about “die Kronborg.” Dr. Archie
gathered that he had crossed on the boat with her.

After the performance was over, Archie took a taxi and started for
Riverside Drive. He meant to see it through to-night. When he entered
the reception hall of the hotel before which he had strolled that
morning, the hall porter challenged him. He said he was waiting for Miss
Kronborg. The porter looked at him suspiciously and asked whether he had
an appointment. He answered brazenly that he had. He was not used to
being questioned by hall boys. Archie sat first in one tapestry chair
and then in another, keeping a sharp eye on the people who came in and
went up in the elevators. He walked about and looked at his watch. An
hour dragged by. No one had come in from the street now for about twenty
minutes, when two women entered, carrying a great many flowers and
followed by a tall young man in chauffeur's uniform. Archie advanced
toward the taller of the two women, who was veiled and carried her head
very firmly. He confronted her just as she reached the elevator.
Although he did not stand directly in her way, something in his attitude
compelled her to stop. She gave him a piercing, defiant glance through
the white scarf that covered her face. Then she lifted her hand and
brushed the scarf back from her head. There was still black on her brows
and lashes. She was very pale and her face was drawn and deeply lined.
She looked, the doctor told himself with a sinking heart, forty years
old. Her suspicious, mystified stare cleared slowly.

“Pardon me,” the doctor murmured, not knowing just how to address her
here before the porters, “I came up from the opera. I merely wanted to
say good-night to you.”

Without speaking, still looking incredulous, she pushed him into the
elevator. She kept her hand on his arm while the cage shot up, and she
looked away from him, frowning, as if she were trying to remember or
realize something. When the cage stopped, she pushed him out of the
elevator through another door, which a maid opened, into a square hall.
There she sank down on a chair and looked up at him.

“Why didn't you let me know ?” she asked in a hoarse voice.

Archie heard himself laughing the old, embarrassed laugh that seldom
happened to him now. “Oh, I wanted to take my chance with you, like
anybody else. It's been so long, now!”

She took his hand through her thick glove and her head dropped forward.
“Yes, it has been long,” she said in the same husky voice, “and so much
has happened.”

“And you are so tired, and I am a clumsy old fellow to break in on you
to-night,” the doctor added sympathetically. “Forgive me, this time.” He
bent over and put his hand soothingly on her shoulder. He felt a strong
shudder run through her from head to foot.

Still bundled in her fur coat as she was, she threw both arms about him
and hugged him. “Oh, Dr. Archie, DR. ARCHIE,”--she shook him,--“don't
let me go. Hold on, now you're here,” she laughed, breaking away from
him at the same moment and sliding out of her fur coat. She left it for
the maid to pick up and pushed the doctor into the sitting-room, where
she turned on the lights. “Let me LOOK at you. Yes; hands, feet, head,
shoulders--just the same. You've grown no older. You can't say as much
for me, can you ?”

She was standing in the middle of the room, in a white silk shirtwaist
and a short black velvet skirt, which somehow suggested that they had
'cut off her petticoats all round about.' She looked distinctly clipped
and plucked. Her hair was parted in the middle and done very close to
her head, as she had worn it under the wig. She looked like a fugitive,
who had escaped from something in clothes caught up at hazard. It
flashed across Dr. Archie that she was running away from the other woman
down at the opera house, who had used her hardly.

He took a step toward her. “I can't tell a thing in the world about you,
Thea--if I may still call you that.”

She took hold of the collar of his overcoat. “Yes, call me that. Do: I
like to hear it. You frighten me a little, but I expect I frighten you
more. I'm always a scarecrow after I sing a long part like that--so
high, too.” She absently pulled out the handkerchief that protruded from
his breast pocket and began to wipe the black paint off her eyebrows and
lashes. “I can't take you in much to-night, but I must see you for a
little while.” She pushed him to a chair. “I shall be more recognizable
to-morrow. You mustn't think of me as you see me to-night. Come at four
to-morrow afternoon and have tea with me. Can you ? That's good.”

She sat down in a low chair beside him and leaned forward, drawing her
shoulders together. She seemed to him inappropriately young and
inappropriately old, shorn of her long tresses at one end and of her
long robes at the other.

“How do you happen to be here ?” she asked abruptly. “How can you leave a
silver mine ? I couldn't! Sure nobody'll cheat you ? But you can explain
everything tomorrow.” She paused. “You remember how you sewed me up in a
poultice, once ? I wish you could to-night. I need a poultice, from top
to toe. Something very disagreeable happened down there. You said you
were out front ? Oh, don't say anything about it. I always know exactly
how it goes, unfortunately. I was rotten in the balcony. I never get
that. You didn't notice it ? Probably not, but I did.”

Here the maid appeared at the door and her mistress rose. “My supper ?
Very well, I'll come. I'd ask you to stay, doctor, but there wouldn't be
enough for two. They seldom send up enough for one,”--she spoke
bitterly. “I haven't got a sense of you yet,”--turning directly to
Archie again. “You haven't been here. You've only announced yourself,
and told me you are coming to-morrow. You haven't seen me, either. This
is not I. But I'll be here waiting for you to-morrow, my whole works!
Goodnight, till then.” She patted him absently on the sleeve and gave
him a little shove toward the door.




V

WHEN Archie got back to his hotel at two o'clock in the morning, he
found Fred Ottenburg's card under his door, with a message scribbled
across the top: “When you come in, please call up room 811, this hotel.”
 A moment later Fred's voice reached him over the telephone.

“That you, Archie ? Won't you come up ? I'm having some supper and I'd
like company. Late ? What does that matter ? I won't keep you long.”

Archie dropped his overcoat and set out for room 811. He found Ottenburg
in the act of touching a match to a chafing-dish, at a table laid for
two in his sitting-room. “I'm catering here,” he announced cheerfully.
“I let the waiter off at midnight, after he'd set me up. You'll have to
account for yourself, Archie.”

The doctor laughed, pointing to three wine-coolers under the table. “Are
you expecting guests ?”

“Yes, two.” Ottenburg held up two fingers,--“you, and my higher self.
He's a thirsty boy, and I don't invite him often. He has been known to
give me a headache. Now, where have you been, Archie, until this
shocking hour ?”

“Bah, you've been banting!” the doctor exclaimed, pulling out his white
gloves as he searched for his handkerchief and throwing them into a
chair. Ottenburg was in evening clothes and very pointed dress shoes.
His white waistcoat, upon which the doctor had fixed a challenging eye,
went down straight from the top button, and he wore a camelia. He was
conspicuously brushed and trimmed and polished. His smoothly controlled
excitement was wholly different from his usual easy cordiality, though
he had his face, as well as his figure, well in hand. On the
serving-table there was an empty champagne pint and a glass. He had been
having a little starter, the doctor told himself, and would probably be
running on high gear before he got through. There was even now an air of
speed about him.

“Been, Freddy ?”--the doctor at last took up his question. “I expect I've
been exactly where you have. Why didn't you tell me you were coming on ?”

“I wasn't, Archie.” Fred lifted the cover of the chafingdish and stirred
the contents. He stood behind the table, holding the lid with his
handkerchief. “I had never thought of such a thing. But Landry, a young
chap who plays her accompaniments and who keeps an eye out for me,
telegraphed me that Madame Rheinecker had gone to Atlantic City with a
bad throat, and Thea might have a chance to sing ELSA. She has sung it
only twice here before, and I missed it in Dresden. So I came on. I got
in at four this afternoon and saw you registered, but I thought I wouldn't
butt in. How lucky you got here just when she was coming on for
this. You couldn't have hit a better time.” Ottenburg stirred the
contents of the dish faster and put in more sherry. “And where have you
been since twelve o'clock, may I ask ?”

Archie looked rather self-conscious, as he sat down on a fragile gilt
chair that rocked under him, and stretched out his long legs. “Well, if
you'll believe me, I had the brutality to go to see her. I wanted to
identify her. Couldn't wait.”

Ottenburg placed the cover quickly on the chafing-dish and took a step
backward. “You did, old sport ? My word! None but the brave deserve the
fair. Well,”--he stooped to turn the wine,--“and how was she ?”

“She seemed rather dazed, and pretty well used up. She seemed
disappointed in herself, and said she hadn't done herself justice in the
balcony scene.”

“Well, if she didn't, she's not the first. Beastly stuff to sing right
in there; lies just on the 'break' in the voice.” Fred pulled a bottle
out of the ice and drew the cork. Lifting his glass he looked meaningly
at Archie. “You know who, doctor. Here goes!” He drank off his glass
with a sigh of satisfaction. After he had turned the lamp low under the
chafing-dish, he remained standing, looking pensively down at the food
on the table. “Well, she rather pulled it off! As a backer, you're a
winner, Archie. I congratulate you.” Fred poured himself another glass.
“Now you must eat something, and so must I. Here, get off that bird cage
and find a steady chair. This stuff ought to be rather good; head
waiter's suggestion. Smells all right.” He bent over the chafing-dish
and began to serve the contents. “Perfectly innocuous: mushrooms and
truffles and a little crab-meat. And now, on the level, Archie, how did
it hit you ?”

Archie turned a frank smile to his friend and shook his head. “It was
all miles beyond me, of course, but it gave me a pulse. The general
excitement got hold of me, I suppose. I like your wine, Freddy.” He put
down his glass. “It goes to the spot to-night. She WAS all right, then ?
You weren't disappointed ?”

“Disappointed ? My dear Archie, that's the high voice we dream of; so
pure and yet so virile and human. That combination hardly ever happens
with sopranos.” Ottenburg sat down and turned to the doctor, speaking
calmly and trying to dispel his friend's manifest bewilderment. “You
see, Archie, there's the voice itself, so beautiful and individual, and
then there's something else; the thing in it which responds to every
shade of thought and feeling, spontaneously, almost unconsciously. That
color has to be born in a singer, it can't be acquired; lots of
beautiful voices haven't a vestige of it. It's almost like another
gift--the rarest of all. The voice simply is the mind and is the heart.
It can't go wrong in interpretation, because it has in it the thing that
makes all interpretation. That's why you feel so sure of her. After
you've listened to her for an hour or so, you aren't afraid of anything.
All the little dreads you have with other artists vanish. You lean back
and you say to yourself, 'No, THAT voice will never betray.' TREULICH
GEFUHRT, TREULICH BEWACHT.”

Archie looked envyingly at Fred's excited, triumphant face. How
satisfactory it must be, he thought, to really know what she was doing
and not to have to take it on hearsay. He took up his glass with a sigh.
“I seem to need a good deal of cooling off to-night. I'd just as lief
forget the Reform Party for once.

“Yes, Fred,” he went on seriously; “I thought it sounded very beautiful,
and I thought she was very beautiful, too. I never imagined she could be
as beautiful as that.”

“Wasn't she ? Every attitude a picture, and always the right kind of
picture, full of that legendary, supernatural thing she gets into it. I
never heard the prayer sung like that before. That look that came in her
eyes; it went right out through the back of the roof. Of course, you get
an ELSA who can look through walls like that, and visions and
Grail-knights happen naturally. She becomes an abbess, that girl, after
LOHENGRIN leaves her. She's made to live with ideas and enthusiasms, not
with a husband.” Fred folded his arms, leaned back in his chair, and
began to sing softly:--


“Ein Ritter nahte da.”


“Doesn't she die, then, at the end ?” the doctor asked guardedly.

Fred smiled, reaching under the table. “Some ELSAS do; she didn't. She
left me with the distinct impression that she was just beginning. Now,
doctor, here's a cold one.” He twirled a napkin smoothly about the green
glass, the cork gave and slipped out with a soft explosion. “And now we
must have another toast. It's up to you, this time.”

The doctor watched the agitation in his glass. “The same,” he said
without lifting his eyes. “That's good enough. I can't raise you.”

Fred leaned forward, and looked sharply into his face. “That's the
point; how COULD you raise me ? Once again!”

“Once again, and always the same!” The doctor put down his glass. “This
doesn't seem to produce any symptoms in me to-night.” He lit a cigar.
“Seriously, Freddy, I wish I knew more about what she's driving at. It
makes me jealous, when you are so in it and I'm not.”

“In it ?” Fred started up. “My God, haven't you seen her this blessed
night ?--when she'd have kicked any other man down the elevator shaft, if
I know her. Leave me something; at least what I can pay my five bucks
for.”

“Seems to me you get a good deal for your five bucks,” said Archie
ruefully. “And that, after all, is what she cares about,--what people
get.”

Fred lit a cigarette, took a puff or two, and then threw it away. He was
lounging back in his chair, and his face was pale and drawn hard by that
mood of intense concentration which lurks under the sunny shallows of
the vineyard. In his voice there was a longer perspective than usual, a
slight remoteness. “You see, Archie, it's all very simple, a natural
development. It's exactly what Mahler said back there in the beginning,
when she sang WOGLINDE. It's the idea, the basic idea, pulsing behind
every bar she sings. She simplifies a character down to the musical idea
it's built on, and makes everything conform to that. The people who
chatter about her being a great actress don't seem to get the notion of
where SHE gets the notion. It all goes back to her original endowment,
her tremendous musical talent. Instead of inventing a lot of business
and expedients to suggest character, she knows the thing at the root,
and lets the musical pattern take care of her. The score pours her into
all those lovely postures, makes the light and shadow go over her face,
lifts her and drops her. She lies on it, the way she used to lie on the
Rhine music. Talk about rhythm!”

The doctor frowned dubiously as a third bottle made its appearance above
the cloth. “Aren't you going in rather strong ?”

Fred laughed. “No, I'm becoming too sober. You see this is breakfast
now; kind of wedding breakfast. I feel rather weddingish. I don't mind.
You know,” he went on as the wine gurgled out, “I was thinking to-night
when they sprung the wedding music, how any fool can have that stuff
played over him when he walks up the aisle with some dough-faced little
hussy who's hooked him. But it isn't every fellow who can see--well,
what we saw tonight. There are compensations in life, Dr. Howard Archie,
though they come in disguise. Did you notice her when she came down the
stairs ? Wonder where she gets that bright-and-morning star look ? Carries
to the last row of the family circle. I moved about all over the house.
I'll tell you a secret, Archie: that carrying power was one of the first
things that put me wise. Noticed it down there in Arizona, in the open.
That, I said, belongs only to the big ones.” Fred got up and began to
move rhythmically about the room, his hands in his pockets. The doctor
was astonished at his ease and steadiness, for there were slight lapses
in his speech. “You see, Archie, ELSA isn't a part that's particularly
suited to Thea's voice at all, as I see her voice. It's over-lyrical for
her. She makes it, but there's nothing in it that fits her like a glove,
except, maybe, that long duet in the third act. There, of course,”--he
held out his hands as if he were measuring something,--“we know exactly
where we are. But wait until they give her a chance at something that
lies properly in her voice, and you'll see me rosier than I am
to-night.”

Archie smoothed the tablecloth with his hand. “I am sure I don't want to
see you any rosier, Fred.”

Ottenburg threw back his head and laughed. “It's enthusiasm, doctor.
It's not the wine. I've got as much inflated as this for a dozen trashy
things: brewers' dinners and political orgies. You, too, have your
extravagances, Archie. And what I like best in you is this particular
enthusiasm, which is not at all practical or sensible, which is
downright Quixotic. You are not altogether what you seem, and you have
your reservations. Living among the wolves, you have not become one.
LUPIBUS VIVENDI NON LUPUS SUM.”

The doctor seemed embarrassed. “I was just thinking how tired she
looked, plucked of all her fine feathers, while we get all the fun.
Instead of sitting here carousing, we ought to go solemnly to bed.”

“I get your idea.” Ottenburg crossed to the window and threw it open.
“Fine night outside; a hag of a moon just setting. It begins to smell
like morning. After all, Archie, think of the lonely and rather solemn
hours we've spent waiting for all this, while she's been--reveling.”

Archie lifted his brows. “I somehow didn't get the idea to-night that
she revels much.”

“I don't mean this sort of thing.” Fred turned toward the light and
stood with his back to the window. “That,” with a nod toward the
wine-cooler, “is only a cheap imitation, that any poor stiff-fingered
fool can buy and feel his shell grow thinner. But take it from me, no
matter what she pays, or how much she may see fit to lie about it, the
real, the master revel is hers.” He leaned back against the window sill
and crossed his arms. “Anybody with all that voice and all that talent
and all that beauty, has her hour. Her hour,” he went on deliberately,
“when she can say, 'there it is, at last, WIE IM TRAUM ICH. As in my
dream I dreamed it, as in my will it was.'”


He stood silent a moment, twisting the flower from his coat by the stem
and staring at the blank wall with haggard abstraction. “Even I can
say to-night, Archie,” he brought out slowly, “'As in my dream I dreamed
it, as in my will it was.' Now, doctor, you may leave me. I'm beautifully
drunk, but not with anything that ever grew in France.”

The doctor rose. Fred tossed his flower out of the window behind him and
came toward the door. “I say,” he called, “have you a date with
anybody ?”

The doctor paused, his hand on the knob. “With Thea, you mean ? Yes. I'm
to go to her at four this afternoon--if you haven't paralyzed me.”

“Well, you won't eat me, will you, if I break in and send up my card ?
She'll probably turn me down cold, but that won't hurt my feelings. If
she ducks me, you tell her for me, that to spite me now she'd have to
cut off more than she can spare. Good-night, Archie.”




VI

IT was late on the morning after the night she sang ELSA, when Thea
Kronborg stirred uneasily in her bed. The room was darkened by two sets
of window shades, and the day outside was thick and cloudy. She turned
and tried to recapture unconsciousness, knowing that she would not be
able to do so. She dreaded waking stale and disappointed after a great
effort. The first thing that came was always the sense of the futility
of such endeavor, and of the absurdity of trying too hard. Up to a
certain point, say eighty degrees, artistic endeavor could be fat and
comfortable, methodical and prudent. But if you went further than that,
if you drew yourself up toward ninety degrees, you parted with your
defenses and left yourself exposed to mischance. The legend was that in
those upper reaches you might be divine; but you were much likelier to
be ridiculous. Your public wanted just about eighty degrees; if you gave
it more it blew its nose and put a crimp in you. In the morning,
especially, it seemed to her very probable that whatever struggled above
the good average was not quite sound. Certainly very little of that
superfluous ardor, which cost so dear, ever got across the footlights.
These misgivings waited to pounce upon her when she wakened. They
hovered about her bed like vultures.

She reached under her pillow for her handkerchief, without opening her
eyes. She had a shadowy memory that there was to be something unusual,
that this day held more disquieting possibilities than days commonly
held. There was something she dreaded; what was it ? Oh, yes, Dr. Archie
was to come at four.

A reality like Dr. Archie, poking up out of the past, reminded one
of disappointments and losses, of a freedom that was no more:
reminded her of blue, golden mornings long ago, when she used to waken
with a burst of joy at recovering her precious self and her precious
world; when she never lay on her pillows at eleven o'clock like
something the waves had washed up. After all, why had he come ? It had
been so long, and so much had happened. The things she had lost, he
would miss readily enough. What she had gained, he would scarcely
perceive. He, and all that he recalled, lived for her as memories. In
sleep, and in hours of illness or exhaustion, she went back to them and
held them to her heart. But they were better as memories. They had
nothing to do with the struggle that made up her actual life. She felt
drearily that she was not flexible enough to be the person her old
friend expected her to be, the person she herself wished to be with him.

Thea reached for the bell and rang twice,--a signal to her maid to order
her breakfast. She rose and ran up the window shades and turned on the
water in her bathroom, glancing into the mirror apprehensively as she
passed it. Her bath usually cheered her, even on low mornings like this.
Her white bathroom, almost as large as her sleeping-room, she regarded as
a refuge. When she turned the key behind her, she left care and vexation
on the other side of the door. Neither her maid nor the management nor
her letters nor her accompanist could get at her now.

When she pinned her braids about her head, dropped her nightgown and
stepped out to begin her Swedish movements, she was a natural creature
again, and it was so that she liked herself best. She slid into the tub
with anticipation and splashed and tumbled about a good deal. Whatever
else she hurried, she never hurried her bath. She used her brushes and
sponges and soaps like toys, fairly playing in the water. Her own body
was always a cheering sight to her. When she was careworn, when her mind
felt old and tired, the freshness of her physical self, her long, firm
lines, the smoothness of her skin, reassured her. This morning, because
of awakened memories, she looked at herself more carefully than usual,
and was not discouraged. While she was in the tub she began to whistle
softly the tenor aria, “AH! FUYEZ, DOUCE IMAGE,” somehow appropriate to
the bath. After a noisy moment under the cold shower, she stepped out on
the rug flushed and glowing, threw her arms above her head, and rose on
her toes, keeping the elevation as long as she could. When she dropped
back on her heels and began to rub herself with the towels, she took up
the aria again, and felt quite in the humor for seeing Dr. Archie. After
she had returned to her bed, the maid brought her letters and the
morning papers with her breakfast.

“Telephone Mr. Landry and ask him if he can come at half-past three,
Theresa, and order tea to be brought up at five.”


When Howard Archie was admitted to Thea's apartment that afternoon, he
was shown into the music-room back of the little reception room. Thea
was sitting in a davenport behind the piano, talking to a young man whom
she later introduced as her friend Mr. Landry. As she rose, and came to
meet him, Archie felt a deep relief, a sudden thankfulness. She no
longer looked clipped and plucked, or dazed and fleeing.

Dr. Archie neglected to take account of the young man to whom he was
presented. He kept Thea's hands and held her where he met her, taking in
the light, lively sweep of her hair, her clear green eyes and her throat
that came up strong and dazzlingly white from her green velvet gown. The
chin was as lovely as ever, the cheeks as smooth. All the lines of last
night had disappeared. Only at the outer corners of her eyes, between
the eye and the temple, were the faintest indications of a future
attack--mere kitten scratches that playfully hinted where one day the
cat would claw her. He studied her without any embarrassment. Last night
everything had been awkward; but now, as he held her hands, a kind of
harmony came between them, a reestablishment of confidence.

“After all, Thea,--in spite of all, I still know you,” he murmured.

She took his arm and led him up to the young man who was standing beside
the piano. “Mr. Landry knows all about you, Dr. Archie. He has known
about you for many years.” While the two men shook hands she stood
between them, drawing them together by her presence and her glances.
“When I first went to Germany, Landry was studying there. He used to be
good enough to work with me when I could not afford to have an
accompanist for more than two hours a day. We got into the way of
working together. He is a singer, too, and has his own career to look
after, but he still manages to give me some time. I want you to be
friends.” She smiled from one to the other.

The rooms, Archie noticed, full of last night's flowers, were furnished
in light colors, the hotel bleakness of them a little softened by a
magnificent Steinway piano, white bookshelves full of books and scores,
some drawings of ballet dancers, and the very deep sofa behind the
piano.

“Of course,” Archie asked apologetically, “you have seen the papers ?”

“Very cordial, aren't they ? They evidently did not expect as much as I
did. ELSA is not really in my voice. I can sing the music, but I have to
go after it.”

“That is exactly,” the doctor came out boldly, “what Fred Ottenburg said
this morning.”

They had remained standing, the three of them, by the piano, where the
gray afternoon light was strongest. Thea turned to the doctor with
interest. “Is Fred in town ? They were from him, then--some flowers that
came last night without a card.” She indicated the white lilacs on the
window sill. “Yes, he would know, certainly,” she said thoughtfully.
“Why don't we sit down ? There will be some tea for you in a minute,
Landry. He's very dependent upon it,” disapprovingly to Archie. “Now
tell me, Doctor, did you really have a good time last night, or were you
uncomfortable ? Did you feel as if I were trying to hold my hat on by my
eyebrows ?”

He smiled. “I had all kinds of a time. But I had no feeling of that
sort. I couldn't be quite sure that it was you at all. That was why I
came up here last night. I felt as if I'd lost you.”

She leaned toward him and brushed his sleeve reassuringly. “Then I
didn't give you an impression of painful struggle ? Landry was singing at
Weber and Fields' last night. He didn't get in until the performance was
half over. But I see the TRIBUNE man felt that I was working pretty
hard. Did you see that notice, Oliver ?”

Dr. Archie looked closely at the red-headed young man for the first
time, and met his lively brown eyes, full of a droll, confiding sort of
humor. Mr. Landry was not prepossessing. He was undersized and clumsily
made, with a red, shiny face and a sharp little nose that looked as if
it had been whittled out of wood and was always in the air, on the scent
of something. Yet it was this queer little beak, with his eyes, that
made his countenance anything of a face at all. From a distance he
looked like the groceryman's delivery boy in a small town. His dress
seemed an acknowledgment of his grotesqueness: a short coat, like a
little boys' roundabout, and a vest fantastically sprigged and dotted,
over a lavender shirt.

At the sound of a muffled buzz, Mr. Landry sprang up.

“May I answer the telephone for you ?” He went to the writing-table and
took up the receiver. “Mr. Ottenburg is downstairs,” he said, turning to
Thea and holding the mouthpiece against his coat.

“Tell him to come up,” she replied without hesitation. “How long are you
going to be in town, Dr. Archie ?”

“Oh, several weeks, if you'll let me stay. I won't hang around and be a
burden to you, but I want to try to get educated up to you, though I
expect it's late to begin.”

Thea rose and touched him lightly on the shoulder. “Well, you'll never
be any younger, will you ?”

“I'm not so sure about that,” the doctor replied gallantly.

The maid appeared at the door and announced Mr. Frederick Ottenburg.
Fred came in, very much got up, the doctor reflected, as he watched him
bending over Thea's hand. He was still pale and looked somewhat
chastened, and the lock of hair that hung down over his forehead was
distinctly moist. But his black afternoon coat, his gray tie and gaiters
were of a correctness that Dr. Archie could never attain for all the
efforts of his faithful slave, Van Deusen, the Denver haberdasher. To be
properly up to those tricks, the doctor supposed, you had to learn them
young. If he were to buy a silk hat that was the twin of Ottenburg's, it
would be shaggy in a week, and he could never carry it as Fred held his.

Ottenburg had greeted Thea in German, and as she replied in the same
language, Archie joined Mr. Landry at the window. “You know Mr.
Ottenburg, he tells me ?”

Mr. Landry's eyes twinkled. “Yes, I regularly follow him about, when
he's in town. I would, even if he didn't send me such wonderful
Christmas presents: Russian vodka by the half-dozen!”

Thea called to them, “Come, Mr. Ottenburg is calling on all of us.
Here's the tea.”

The maid opened the door and two waiters from downstairs appeared with
covered trays. The tea-table was in the parlor. Thea drew Ottenburg with
her and went to inspect it. “Where's the rum ? Oh, yes, in that thing!
Everything seems to be here, but send up some currant preserves and
cream cheese for Mr. Ottenburg. And in about fifteen minutes, bring some
fresh toast. That's all, thank you.”

For the next few minutes there was a clatter of teacups and responses
about sugar. “Landry always takes rum. I'm glad the rest of you don't.
I'm sure it's bad.” Thea poured the tea standing and got through with it
as quickly as possible, as if it were a refreshment snatched between
trains. The tea-table and the little room in which it stood seemed to be
out of scale with her long step, her long reach, and the energy of her
movements. Dr. Archie, standing near her, was pleasantly aware of the
animation of her figure. Under the clinging velvet, her body seemed
independent and unsubdued.

They drifted, with their plates and cups, back to the music-room. When
Thea followed them, Ottenburg put down his tea suddenly. “Aren't you
taking anything ? Please let me.” He started back to the table.

“No, thank you, nothing. I'm going to run over that aria for you
presently, to convince you that I can do it. How did the duet go, with
Schlag ?”

She was standing in the doorway and Fred came up to her: “That you'll
never do any better. You've worked your voice into it perfectly. Every
NUANCE--wonderful!”

“Think so ?” She gave him a sidelong glance and spoke with a certain
gruff shyness which did not deceive anybody, and was not meant to
deceive. The tone was equivalent to “Keep it up. I like it, but I'm
awkward with it.”

Fred held her by the door and did keep it up, furiously, for full five
minutes. She took it with some confusion, seeming all the while to be
hesitating, to be arrested in her course and trying to pass him. But she
did not really try to pass, and her color deepened. Fred spoke in
German, and Archie caught from her an occasional JA ? SO ? muttered rather
than spoken.

When they rejoined Landry and Dr. Archie, Fred took up his tea again. “I
see you're singing VENUS Saturday night. Will they never let you have a
chance at ELIZABETH ?”

She shrugged her shoulders. “Not here. There are so many singers here,
and they try us out in such a stingy way. Think of it, last year I came
over in October, and it was the first of December before I went on at
all! I'm often sorry I left Dresden.”

“Still,” Fred argued, “Dresden is limited.”

“Just so, and I've begun to sigh for those very limitations. In New York
everything is impersonal. Your audience never knows its own mind, and
its mind is never twice the same. I'd rather sing where the people are
pig-headed and throw carrots at you if you don't do it the way they like
it. The house here is splendid, and the night audiences are exciting. I
hate the matinees; like singing at a KAFFEKLATSCH.” She rose and turned
on the lights.

“Ah!” Fred exclaimed, “why do you do that ? That is a signal that tea is
over.” He got up and drew out his gloves.

“Not at all. Shall you be here Saturday night ?” She sat down on the
piano bench and leaned her elbow back on the keyboard. “Necker sings
ELIZABETH. Make Dr. Archie go. Everything she sings is worth hearing.”

“But she's failing so. The last time I heard her she had no voice at
all. She IS a poor vocalist!”

Thea cut him off. “She's a great artist, whether she's in voice or not,
and she's the only one here. If you want a big voice, you can take my
ORTRUDE of last night; that's big enough, and vulgar enough.”

Fred laughed and turned away, this time with decision. “I don't want
her!” he protested energetically. “I only wanted to get a rise out of
you. I like Necker's ELIZABETH well enough. I like your VENUS well
enough, too.”

“It's a beautiful part, and it's often dreadfully sung. It's very hard
to sing, of course.”

Ottenburg bent over the hand she held out to him. “For an uninvited
guest, I've fared very well. You were nice to let me come up. I'd have
been terribly cut up if you'd sent me away. May I ?” He kissed her hand
lightly and backed toward the door, still smiling, and promising to keep
an eye on Archie. “He can't be trusted at all, Thea. One of the waiters
at Martin's worked a Tourainian hare off on him at luncheon yesterday,
for seven twenty-five.”

Thea broke into a laugh, the deep one he recognized. “Did he have a
ribbon on, this hare ? Did they bring him in a gilt cage ?”

“No,”--Archie spoke up for himself,--“they brought him in a brown sauce,
which was very good. He didn't taste very different from any rabbit.”

“Probably came from a push-cart on the East Side.” Thea looked at her
old friend commiseratingly. “Yes, DO keep an eye on him, Fred. I had no
idea,” shaking her head. “Yes, I'll be obliged to you.”

“Count on me!” Their eyes met in a gay smile, and Fred bowed himself
out.




VII

ON Saturday night Dr. Archie went with Fred Ottenburg to hear
“Tannhauser.” Thea had a rehearsal on Sunday afternoon, but as she was
not on the bill again until Wednesday, she promised to dine with Archie
and Ottenburg on Monday, if they could make the dinner early.

At a little after eight on Monday evening, the three friends returned to
Thea's apartment and seated themselves for an hour of quiet talk.

“I'm sorry we couldn't have had Landry with us tonight,” Thea said, “but
he's on at Weber and Fields' every night now. You ought to hear him, Dr.
Archie. He often sings the old Scotch airs you used to love.”

“Why not go down this evening ?” Fred suggested hopefully, glancing at
his watch. “That is, if you'd like to go. I can telephone and find what
time he comes on.”

Thea hesitated. “No, I think not. I took a long walk this afternoon and
I'm rather tired. I think I can get to sleep early and be so much ahead.
I don't mean at once, however,” seeing Dr. Archie's disappointed look.
“I always like to hear Landry,” she added. “He never had much voice, and
it's worn, but there's a sweetness about it, and he sings with such
taste.”

“Yes, doesn't he ? May I ?” Fred took out his cigarette case. “It really
doesn't bother your throat ?”

“A little doesn't. But cigar smoke does. Poor Dr. Archie! Can you do
with one of those ?”

“I'm learning to like them,” the doctor declared, taking one from the
case Fred proffered him.

“Landry's the only fellow I know in this country who can do that sort of
thing,” Fred went on. “Like the best English ballad singers. He can sing
even popular stuff by higher lights, as it were.”

Thea nodded. “Yes; sometimes I make him sing his most foolish things for
me. It's restful, as he does it. That's when I'm homesick, Dr. Archie.”

“You knew him in Germany, Thea ?” Dr. Archie had quietly abandoned his
cigarette as a comfortless article. “When you first went over ?”

“Yes. He was a good friend to a green girl. He helped me with my German
and my music and my general discouragement. Seemed to care more about my
getting on than about himself. He had no money, either. An old aunt had
loaned him a little to study on.--Will you answer that, Fred ?”

Fred caught up the telephone and stopped the buzz while Thea went on
talking to Dr. Archie about Landry. Telling some one to hold the wire,
he presently put down the instrument and approached Thea with a startled
expression on his face.

“It's the management,” he said quietly. “Gloeckler has broken down:
fainting fits. Madame Rheinecker is in Atlantic City and Schramm is
singing in Philadelphia tonight. They want to know whether you can come
down and finish SIEGLINDE.”

“What time is it ?”

“Eight fifty-five. The first act is just over. They can hold the curtain
twenty-five minutes.”

Thea did not move. “Twenty-five and thirty-five makes sixty,” she
muttered. “Tell them I'll come if they hold the curtain till I am in the
dressing-room. Say I'll have to wear her costumes, and the dresser must
have everything ready. Then call a taxi, please.”

Thea had not changed her position since he first interrupted her, but
she had grown pale and was opening and shutting her hands rapidly. She
looked, Fred thought, terrified. He half turned toward the telephone,
but hung on one foot.

“Have you ever sung the part ?” he asked.

“No, but I've rehearsed it. That's all right. Get the cab.” Still she
made no move. She merely turned perfectly blank eyes to Dr. Archie and
said absently, “It's curious, but just at this minute I can't remember a
bar of 'Walkure' after the first act. And I let my maid go out.” She
sprang up and beckoned Archie without so much, he felt sure, as knowing
who he was. “Come with me.” She went quickly into her sleeping-chamber
and threw open a door into a trunk-room. “See that white trunk ? It's not
locked. It's full of wigs, in boxes. Look until you find one marked
'Ring 2.' Bring it quick!” While she directed him, she threw open a
square trunk and began tossing out shoes of every shape and color.

Ottenburg appeared at the door. “Can I help you ?”

She threw him some white sandals with long laces and silk stockings
pinned to them. “Put those in something, and then go to the piano and
give me a few measures in there--you know.” She was behaving somewhat
like a cyclone now, and while she wrenched open drawers and closet
doors, Ottenburg got to the piano as quickly as possible and began to
herald the reappearance of the Volsung pair, trusting to memory.

In a few moments Thea came out enveloped in her long fur coat with a
scarf over her head and knitted woolen gloves on her hands. Her glassy
eye took in the fact that Fred was playing from memory, and even in her
distracted state, a faint smile flickered over her colorless lips. She
stretched out a woolly hand, “The score, please. Behind you, there.”

Dr. Archie followed with a canvas box and a satchel. As they went
through the hall, the men caught up their hats and coats. They left the
music-room, Fred noticed, just seven minutes after he got the telephone
message. In the elevator Thea said in that husky whisper which had so
perplexed Dr. Archie when he first heard it, “Tell the driver he must do
it in twenty minutes, less if he can. He must leave the light on in the
cab. I can do a good deal in twenty minutes. If only you hadn't made me
eat--Damn that duck!” she broke out bitterly; “why did you ?”

“Wish I had it back! But it won't bother you, to-night. You need
strength,” he pleaded consolingly.

But she only muttered angrily under her breath, “Idiot, idiot!”

Ottenburg shot ahead and instructed the driver, while the doctor put
Thea into the cab and shut the door. She did not speak to either of them
again. As the driver scrambled into his seat she opened the score and
fixed her eyes upon it. Her face, in the white light, looked as bleak as
a stone quarry.

As her cab slid away, Ottenburg shoved Archie into a second taxi that
waited by the curb. “We'd better trail her,” he explained. “There might
be a hold-up of some kind.” As the cab whizzed off he broke into an
eruption of profanity.

“What's the matter, Fred ?” the doctor asked. He was a good deal dazed by
the rapid evolutions of the last ten minutes.

“Matter enough!” Fred growled, buttoning his overcoat with a shiver.
“What a way to sing a part for the first time! That duck really is on my
conscience. It will be a wonder if she can do anything but quack!
Scrambling on in the middle of a performance like this, with no
rehearsal! The stuff she has to sing in there is a fright--rhythm,
pitch,--and terribly difficult intervals.”

“She looked frightened,” Dr. Archie said thoughtfully, “but I thought
she looked--determined.”

Fred sniffed. “Oh, determined! That's the kind of rough deal that makes
savages of singers. Here's a part she's worked on and got ready for for
years, and now they give her a chance to go on and butcher it. Goodness
knows when she's looked at the score last, or whether she can use the
business she's studied with this cast. Necker's singing BRUNNHILDE; she
may help her, if it's not one of her sore nights.”

“Is she sore at Thea ?” Dr. Archie asked wonderingly.

“My dear man, Necker's sore at everything. She's breaking up; too early;
just when she ought to be at her best. There's one story that she is
struggling under some serious malady, another that she learned a bad
method at the Prague Conservatory and has ruined her organ. She's the
sorest thing in the world. If she weathers this winter through, it'll be
her last. She's paying for it with the last rags of her voice. And
then--” Fred whistled softly.

“Well, what then ?”

“Then our girl may come in for some of it. It's dog eat dog, in this
game as in every other.”

The cab stopped and Fred and Dr. Archie hurried to the box office. The
Monday-night house was sold out. They bought standing room and entered
the auditorium just as the press representative of the house was
thanking the audience for their patience and telling them that although
Madame Gloeckler was too ill to sing, Miss Kronborg had kindly consented
to finish her part. This announcement was met with vehement applause
from the upper circles of the house.

“She has her--constituents,” Dr. Archie murmured.

“Yes, up there, where they're young and hungry. These people down here
have dined too well. They won't mind, however. They like fires and
accidents and DIVERTISSEMENTS. Two SIEGLINDES are more unusual than one,
so they'll be satisfied.”


After the final disappearance of the mother of Siegfried, Ottenburg and
the doctor slipped out through the crowd and left the house. Near the
stage entrance Fred found the driver who had brought Thea down. He
dismissed him and got a larger car. He and Archie waited on the
sidewalk, and when Kronborg came out alone they gathered her into the
cab and sprang in after her.

Thea sank back into a corner of the back seat and yawned. “Well, I got
through, eh ?” Her tone was reassuring. “On the whole, I think I've given
you gentlemen a pretty lively evening, for one who has no social
accomplishments.”

“Rather! There was something like a popular uprising at the end of the
second act. Archie and I couldn't keep it up as long as the rest of them
did. A howl like that ought to show the management which way the wind is
blowing. You probably know you were magnificent.”

“I thought it went pretty well,” she spoke impartially. “I was rather
smart to catch his tempo there, at the beginning of the first
recitative, when he came in too soon, don't you think ? It's tricky in
there, without a rehearsal. Oh, I was all right! He took that
syncopation too fast in the beginning. Some singers take it fast
there--think it sounds more impassioned. That's one way!” She sniffed,
and Fred shot a mirthful glance at Archie. Her boastfulness would have
been childish in a schoolboy. In the light of what she had done, of the
strain they had lived through during the last two hours, it made one
laugh,--almost cry. She went on, robustly: “And I didn't feel my dinner,
really, Fred. I am hungry again, I'm ashamed to say,--and I forgot to
order anything at my hotel.”

Fred put his hand on the door. “Where to ? You must have food.”

“Do you know any quiet place, where I won't be stared at ? I've still got
make-up on.”

“I do. Nice English chop-house on Forty-fourth Street. Nobody there at
night but theater people after the show, and a few bachelors.” He opened
the door and spoke to the driver.

As the car turned, Thea reached across to the front seat and drew Dr.
Archie's handkerchief out of his breast pocket.

“This comes to me naturally,” she said, rubbing her cheeks and eyebrows.
“When I was little I always loved your handkerchiefs because they were
silk and smelled of Cologne water. I think they must have been the only
really clean handkerchiefs in Moonstone. You were always wiping my face
with them, when you met me out in the dust, I remember. Did I never have
any ?”

“I think you'd nearly always used yours up on your baby brother.”

Thea sighed. “Yes, Thor had such a way of getting messy. You say he's a
good chauffeur ?” She closed her eyes for a moment as if they were tired.
Suddenly she looked up. “Isn't it funny, how we travel in circles ? Here
you are, still getting me clean, and Fred is still feeding me. I would
have died of starvation at that boarding-house on Indiana Avenue if he
hadn't taken me out to the Buckingham and filled me up once in a while.
What a cavern I was to fill, too. The waiters used to look astonished.
I'm still singing on that food.”

Fred alighted and gave Thea his arm as they crossed the icy sidewalk.
They were taken upstairs in an antiquated lift and found the cheerful
chop-room half full of supper parties. An English company playing at the
Empire had just come in. The waiters, in red waistcoats, were hurrying
about. Fred got a table at the back of the room, in a corner, and urged
his waiter to get the oysters on at once.

“Takes a few minutes to open them, sir,” the man expostulated.

“Yes, but make it as few as possible, and bring the lady's first. Then
grilled chops with kidneys, and salad.”

Thea began eating celery stalks at once, from the base to the foliage.
“Necker said something nice to me tonight. You might have thought the
management would say something, but not they.” She looked at Fred from
under her blackened lashes. “It WAS a stunt, to jump in and sing that
second act without rehearsal. It doesn't sing itself.”

Ottenburg was watching her brilliant eyes and her face. She was much
handsomer than she had been early in the evening. Excitement of this
sort enriched her. It was only under such excitement, he reflected, that
she was entirely illuminated, or wholly present. At other times there
was something a little cold and empty, like a big room with no people in
it. Even in her most genial moods there was a shadow of restlessness, as
if she were waiting for something and were exercising the virtue of
patience. During dinner she had been as kind as she knew how to be, to
him and to Archie, and had given them as much of herself as she could.
But, clearly, she knew only one way of being really kind, from the core
of her heart out; and there was but one way in which she could give
herself to people largely and gladly, spontaneously. Even as a girl she
had been at her best in vigorous effort, he remembered; physical effort,
when there was no other kind at hand. She could be expansive only in
explosions. Old Nathanmeyer had seen it. In the very first song Fred had
ever heard her sing, she had unconsciously declared it.

Thea Kronborg turned suddenly from her talk with Archie and peered
suspiciously into the corner where Ottenburg sat with folded arms,
observing her. “What's the matter with you, Fred ? I'm afraid of you when
you're quiet,--fortunately you almost never are. What are you thinking
about ?”

“I was wondering how you got right with the orchestra so quickly, there
at first. I had a flash of terror,” he replied easily.

She bolted her last oyster and ducked her head. “So had I! I don't know
how I did catch it. Desperation, I suppose; same way the Indian babies
swim when they're thrown into the river. I HAD to. Now it's over, I'm
glad I had to. I learned a whole lot to-night.”

Archie, who usually felt that it behooved him to be silent during such
discussions, was encouraged by her geniality to venture, “I don't see
how you can learn anything in such a turmoil; or how you can keep your
mind on it, for that matter.”

Thea glanced about the room and suddenly put her hand up to her hair.
“Mercy, I've no hat on! Why didn't you tell me ? And I seem to be wearing
a rumpled dinner dress, with all this paint on my face! I must look like
something you picked up on Second Avenue. I hope there are no Colorado
reformers about, Dr. Archie. What a dreadful old pair these people must
be thinking you! Well, I had to eat.” She sniffed the savor of the grill
as the waiter uncovered it. “Yes, draught beer, please. No, thank you,
Fred, NO champagne.--To go back to your question, Dr. Archie, you can
believe I keep my mind on it. That's the whole trick, in so far as stage
experience goes; keeping right there every second. If I think of
anything else for a flash, I'm gone, done for. But at the same time, one
can take things in--with another part of your brain, maybe. It's
different from what you get in study, more practical and conclusive.
There are some things you learn best in calm, and some in storm. You
learn the delivery of a part only before an audience.”

“Heaven help us,” gasped Ottenburg. “Weren't you hungry, though! It's
beautiful to see you eat.”

“Glad you like it. Of course I'm hungry. Are you staying over for
'Rheingold' Friday afternoon ?”

“My dear Thea,”--Fred lit a cigarette,--“I'm a serious business man now.
I have to sell beer. I'm due in Chicago on Wednesday. I'd come back to
hear you, but FRICKA is not an alluring part.”

“Then you've never heard it well done.” She spoke up hotly. “Fat German
woman scolding her husband, eh ? That's not my idea. Wait till you hear
my FRICKA. It's a beautiful part.” Thea leaned forward on the table and
touched Archie's arm. “You remember, Dr. Archie, how my mother always
wore her hair, parted in the middle and done low on her neck behind, so
you got the shape of her head and such a calm, white forehead ? I wear
mine like that for FRICKA. A little more coronet effect, built up a
little higher at the sides, but the idea's the same. I think you'll
notice it.” She turned to Ottenburg reproachfully: “It's noble music,
Fred, from the first measure. There's nothing lovelier than the WONNIGER
HAUSRATH. It's all such comprehensive sort of music--fateful. Of course,
FRICKA KNOWS,” Thea ended quietly.

Fred sighed. “There, you've spoiled my itinerary. Now I'll have to come
back, of course. Archie, you'd better get busy about seats to-morrow.”

“I can get you box seats, somewhere. I know nobody here, and I never ask
for any.” Thea began hunting among her wraps. “Oh, how funny! I've only
these short woolen gloves, and no sleeves. Put on my coat first. Those
English people can't make out where you got your lady, she's so made up
of contradictions.” She rose laughing and plunged her arms into the coat
Dr. Archie held for her. As she settled herself into it and buttoned it
under her chin, she gave him an old signal with her eyelid. “I'd like to
sing another part to-night. This is the sort of evening I fancy, when
there's something to do. Let me see: I have to sing in 'Trovatore'
Wednesday night, and there are rehearsals for the 'Ring' every day this
week. Consider me dead until Saturday, Dr. Archie. I invite you both to
dine with me on Saturday night, the day after 'Rheingold.' And Fred must
leave early, for I want to talk to you alone. You've been here nearly a
week, and I haven't had a serious word with you. TAK FOR MAD, Fred, as
the Norwegians say.”




VIII

THE “Ring of the Niebelungs” was to be given at the Metropolitan on four
successive Friday afternoons. After the first of these performances,
Fred Ottenburg went home with Landry for tea. Landry was one of the few
public entertainers who own real estate in New York. He lived in a
little three-story brick house on Jane Street, in Greenwich Village,
which had been left to him by the same aunt who paid for his musical
education.

Landry was born, and spent the first fifteen years of his life, on a
rocky Connecticut farm not far from Cos Cob. His father was an ignorant,
violent man, a bungling farmer and a brutal husband. The farmhouse,
dilapidated and damp, stood in a hollow beside a marshy pond. Oliver had
worked hard while he lived at home, although he was never clean or warm
in winter and had wretched food all the year round. His spare, dry
figure, his prominent larynx, and the peculiar red of his face and hands
belonged to the choreboy he had never outgrown. It was as if the farm,
knowing he would escape from it as early as he could, had ground its
mark on him deep. When he was fifteen Oliver ran away and went to live
with his Catholic aunt, on Jane Street, whom his mother was never
allowed to visit. The priest of St. Joseph's Parish discovered that he
had a voice.

Landry had an affection for the house on Jane Street, where he had first
learned what cleanliness and order and courtesy were. When his aunt died
he had the place done over, got an Irish housekeeper, and lived there
with a great many beautiful things he had collected. His living expenses
were never large, but he could not restrain himself from buying graceful
and useless objects. He was a collector for much the same reason that he
was a Catholic, and he was a Catholic chiefly because his father used to
sit in the kitchen and read aloud to his hired men disgusting
“exposures” of the Roman Church, enjoying equally the hideous stories
and the outrage to his wife's feelings.

At first Landry bought books; then rugs, drawings, china. He had a
beautiful collection of old French and Spanish fans. He kept them in an
escritoire he had brought from Spain, but there were always a few of
them lying about in his sitting-room.

While Landry and his guest were waiting for the tea to be brought,
Ottenburg took up one of these fans from the low marble mantel-shelf and
opened it in the firelight. One side was painted with a pearly sky and
floating clouds. On the other was a formal garden where an elegant
shepherdess with a mask and crook was fleeing on high heels from a
satin-coated shepherd.

“You ought not to keep these things about, like this, Oliver. The dust
from your grate must get at them.”

“It does, but I get them to enjoy them, not to have them. They're
pleasant to glance at and to play with at odd times like this, when one
is waiting for tea or something.”

Fred smiled. The idea of Landry stretched out before his fire playing
with his fans, amused him. Mrs. McGinnis brought the tea and put it
before the hearth: old teacups that were velvety to the touch and a
pot-bellied silver cream pitcher of an Early Georgian pattern, which was
always brought, though Landry took rum.

Fred drank his tea walking about, examining Landry's sumptuous
writing-table in the alcove and the Boucher drawing in red chalk over
the mantel. “I don't see how you can stand this place without a heroine.
It would give me a raging thirst for gallantries.”

Landry was helping himself to a second cup of tea. “Works quite the
other way with me. It consoles me for the lack of her. It's just
feminine enough to be pleasant to return to. Not any more tea ? Then sit
down and play for me. I'm always playing for other people, and I never
have a chance to sit here quietly and listen.”

Ottenburg opened the piano and began softly to boom forth the shadowy
introduction to the opera they had just heard. “Will that do ?” he asked
jokingly. “I can't seem to get it out of my head.”

“Oh, excellently! Thea told me it was quite wonderful, the way you can
do Wagner scores on the piano. So few people can give one any idea of
the music. Go ahead, as long as you like. I can smoke, too.” Landry
flattened himself out on his cushions and abandoned himself to ease with
the circumstance of one who has never grown quite accustomed to ease.

Ottenburg played on, as he happened to remember. He understood now why
Thea wished him to hear her in “Rheingold.” It had been clear to him as
soon as FRICKA rose from sleep and looked out over the young world,
stretching one white arm toward the new Gotterburg shining on the
heights. “WOTAN! GEMAHL! ERWACHE!” She was pure Scandinavian, this
FRICKA: “Swedish summer”! he remembered old Mr. Nathanmeyer's phrase.
She had wished him to see her because she had a distinct kind of
loveliness for this part, a shining beauty like the light of sunset on
distant sails. She seemed to take on the look of immortal loveliness,
the youth of the golden apples, the shining body and the shining mind.
FRICKA had been a jealous spouse to him for so long that he had forgot
she meant wisdom before she meant domestic order, and that, in any
event, she was always a goddess. The FRICKA of that afternoon was so
clear and sunny, so nobly conceived, that she made a whole atmosphere
about herself and quite redeemed from shabbiness the helplessness and
unscrupulousness of the gods. Her reproaches to WOTAN were the pleadings
of a tempered mind, a consistent sense of beauty. In the long silences
of her part, her shining presence was a visible complement to the
discussion of the orchestra. As the themes which were to help in weaving
the drama to its end first came vaguely upon the ear, one saw their
import and tendency in the face of this clearest-visioned of the gods.

In the scene between FRICKA and WOTAN, Ottenburg stopped. “I can't seem
to get the voices, in there.”

Landry chuckled. “Don't try. I know it well enough. I expect I've been
over that with her a thousand times. I was playing for her almost every
day when she was first working on it. When she begins with a part she's
hard to work with: so slow you'd think she was stupid if you didn't know
her. Of course she blames it all on her accompanist. It goes on like
that for weeks sometimes. This did. She kept shaking her head and
staring and looking gloomy. All at once, she got her line--it usually
comes suddenly, after stretches of not getting anywhere at all--and
after that it kept changing and clearing. As she worked her voice into
it, it got more and more of that 'gold' quality that makes her FRICKA so
different.”

Fred began FRICKA'S first aria again. “It's certainly different. Curious
how she does it. Such a beautiful idea, out of a part that's always been
so ungrateful. She's a lovely thing, but she was never so beautiful as
that, really. Nobody is.” He repeated the loveliest phrase. “How does
she manage it, Landry ? You've worked with her.”

Landry drew cherishingly on the last cigarette he meant to permit
himself before singing. “Oh, it's a question of a big personality--and
all that goes with it. Brains, of course. Imagination, of course. But
the important thing is that she was born full of color, with a rich
personality. That's a gift of the gods, like a fine nose. You have it,
or you haven't. Against it, intelligence and musicianship and habits of
industry don't count at all. Singers are a conventional race. When Thea
was studying in Berlin the other girls were mortally afraid of her. She
has a pretty rough hand with women, dull ones, and she could be rude,
too! The girls used to call her DIE WOLFIN.”

Fred thrust his hands into his pockets and leaned back against the
piano. “Of course, even a stupid woman could get effects with such
machinery: such a voice and body and face. But they couldn't possibly
belong to a stupid woman, could they ?”

Landry shook his head. “It's personality; that's as near as you can come
to it. That's what constitutes real equipment. What she does is
interesting because she does it. Even the things she discards are
suggestive. I regret some of them. Her conceptions are colored in so
many different ways. You've heard her ELIZABETH ? Wonderful, isn't it ?
She was working on that part years ago when her mother was ill. I could
see her anxiety and grief getting more and more into the part. The last
act is heart-breaking. It's as homely as a country prayer meeting: might
be any lonely woman getting ready to die. It's full of the thing every
plain creature finds out for himself, but that never gets written down.
It's unconscious memory, maybe; inherited memory, like folk-music. I
call it personality.”

Fred laughed, and turning to the piano began coaxing the FRICKA music
again. “Call it anything you like, my boy. I have a name for it myself,
but I shan't tell you.” He looked over his shoulder at Landry, stretched
out by the fire. “You have a great time watching her, don't you ?”

“Oh, yes!” replied Landry simply. “I'm not interested in much that goes
on in New York. Now, if you'll excuse me, I'll have to dress.” He rose
with a reluctant sigh. “Can I get you anything ? Some whiskey ?”

“Thank you, no. I'll amuse myself here. I don't often get a chance at a
good piano when I'm away from home. You haven't had this one long, have
you ? Action's a bit stiff. I say,” he stopped Landry in the doorway,
“has Thea ever been down here ?”

Landry turned back. “Yes. She came several times when I had erysipelas.
I was a nice mess, with two nurses. She brought down some inside
window-boxes, planted with crocuses and things. Very cheering, only I
couldn't see them or her.”

“Didn't she like your place ?”

“She thought she did, but I fancy it was a good deal cluttered up for
her taste. I could hear her pacing about like something in a cage. She
pushed the piano back against the wall and the chairs into corners, and
she broke my amber elephant.” Landry took a yellow object some four
inches high from one of his low bookcases. “You can see where his leg is
glued on,--a souvenir. Yes, he's lemon amber, very fine.”

Landry disappeared behind the curtains and in a moment Fred heard the
wheeze of an atomizer. He put the amber elephant on the piano beside him
and seemed to get a great deal of amusement out of the beast.




IX

WHEN Archie and Ottenburg dined with Thea on Saturday evening, they were
served downstairs in the hotel dining-room, but they were to have their
coffee in her own apartment. As they were going up in the elevator after
dinner, Fred turned suddenly to Thea. “And why, please, did you break
Landry's amber elephant ?”

She looked guilty and began to laugh. “Hasn't he got over that yet ? I
didn't really mean to break it. I was perhaps careless. His things are
so over-petted that I was tempted to be careless with a lot of them.”

“How can you be so heartless, when they're all he has in the world ?”

“He has me. I'm a great deal of diversion for him; all he needs. There,”
 she said as she opened the door into her own hall, “I shouldn't have
said that before the elevator boy.”

“Even an elevator boy couldn't make a scandal about Oliver. He's such a
catnip man.”

Dr. Archie laughed, but Thea, who seemed suddenly to have thought of
something annoying, repeated blankly, “Catnip man ?”

“Yes, he lives on catnip, and rum tea. But he's not the only one. You
are like an eccentric old woman I know in Boston, who goes about in the
spring feeding catnip to street cats. You dispense it to a lot of
fellows. Your pull seems to be more with men than with women, you know;
with seasoned men, about my age, or older. Even on Friday afternoon I
kept running into them, old boys I hadn't seen for years, thin at the
part and thick at the girth, until I stood still in the draft and held
my hair on. They're always there; I hear them talking about you in the
smoking room. Probably we don't get to the point of apprehending
anything good until we're about forty. Then, in the light of what is
going, and of what, God help us! is coming, we arrive at understanding.”

“I don't see why people go to the opera, anyway,--serious people.” She
spoke discontentedly. “I suppose they get something, or think they do.
Here's the coffee. There, please,” she directed the waiter. Going to the
table she began to pour the coffee, standing. She wore a white dress
trimmed with crystals which had rattled a good deal during dinner, as
all her movements had been impatient and nervous, and she had twisted
the dark velvet rose at her girdle until it looked rumpled and weary.
She poured the coffee as if it were a ceremony in which she did not
believe. “Can you make anything of Fred's nonsense, Dr. Archie ?” she
asked, as he came to take his cup.

Fred approached her. “My nonsense is all right. The same brand has gone
with you before. It's you who won't be jollied. What's the matter ? You
have something on your mind.”

“I've a good deal. Too much to be an agreeable hostess.” She turned
quickly away from the coffee and sat down on the piano bench, facing the
two men. “For one thing, there's a change in the cast for Friday
afternoon. They're going to let me sing SIEGLINDE.” Her frown did not
conceal the pleasure with which she made this announcement.

“Are you going to keep us dangling about here forever, Thea ? Archie and
I are supposed to have other things to do.” Fred looked at her with an
excitement quite as apparent as her own.

“Here I've been ready to sing SIEGLINDE for two years, kept in torment,
and now it comes off within two weeks, just when I want to be seeing
something of Dr. Archie. I don't know what their plans are down there.
After Friday they may let me cool for several weeks, and they may rush
me. I suppose it depends somewhat on how things go Friday afternoon.”

“Oh, they'll go fast enough! That's better suited to your voice than
anything you've sung here. That gives you every opportunity I've waited
for.” Ottenburg crossed the room and standing beside her began to play
“DU BIST DER LENZ.”

With a violent movement Thea caught his wrists and pushed his hands away
from the keys.

“Fred, can't you be serious ? A thousand things may happen between this
and Friday to put me out. Something will happen. If that part were sung
well, as well as it ought to be, it would be one of the most beautiful
things in the world. That's why it never is sung right, and never will
be.” She clenched her hands and opened them despairingly, looking out of
the open window. “It's inaccessibly beautiful!” she brought out sharply.

Fred and Dr. Archie watched her. In a moment she turned back to them.
“It's impossible to sing a part like that well for the first time,
except for the sort who will never sing it any better. Everything hangs
on that first night, and that's bound to be bad. There you are,” she
shrugged impatiently. “For one thing, they change the cast at the
eleventh hour and then rehearse the life out of me.”

Ottenburg put down his cup with exaggerated care. “Still, you really
want to do it, you know.”

“Want to ?” she repeated indignantly; “of course I want to! If this were
only next Thursday night--But between now and Friday I'll do nothing but
fret away my strength. Oh, I'm not saying I don't need the rehearsals!
But I don't need them strung out through a week. That system's well
enough for phlegmatic singers; it only drains me. Every single feature
of operatic routine is detrimental to me. I usually go on like a horse
that's been fixed to lose a race. I have to work hard to do my worst,
let alone my best. I wish you could hear me sing well, once,” she turned
to Fred defiantly; “I have, a few times in my life, when there was
nothing to gain by it.”

Fred approached her again and held out his hand. “I recall my
instructions, and now I'll leave you to fight it out with Archie. He
can't possibly represent managerial stupidity to you as I seem to have a
gift for doing.”

As he smiled down at her, his good humor, his good wishes, his
understanding, embarrassed her and recalled her to herself. She kept her
seat, still holding his hand. “All the same, Fred, isn't it too bad,
that there are so many things--” She broke off with a shake of the head.

“My dear girl, if I could bridge over the agony between now and Friday
for you--But you know the rules of the game; why torment yourself ? You
saw the other night that you had the part under your thumb. Now walk,
sleep, play with Archie, keep your tiger hungry, and she'll spring all
right on Friday. I'll be there to see her, and there'll be more than I,
I suspect. Harsanyi's on the Wilhelm der Grosse; gets in on Thursday.”

“Harsanyi ?” Thea's eye lighted. “I haven't seen him for years. We always
miss each other.” She paused, hesitating. “Yes, I should like that. But
he'll be busy, maybe ?”

“He gives his first concert at Carnegie Hall, week after next. Better
send him a box if you can.”

“Yes, I'll manage it.” Thea took his hand again. “Oh, I should like
that, Fred!” she added impulsively. “Even if I were put out, he'd get
the idea,”--she threw back her head,--“for there is an idea!”

“Which won't penetrate here,” he tapped his brow and began to laugh.
“You are an ungrateful huzzy, COMME LES AUTRES!”

Thea detained him as he turned away. She pulled a flower out of a
bouquet on the piano and absently drew the stem through the lapel of his
coat. “I shall be walking in the Park to-morrow afternoon, on the
reservoir path, between four and five, if you care to join me. You know
that after Harsanyi I'd rather please you than anyone else. You know a
lot, but he knows even more than you.”

“Thank you. Don't try to analyze it. SCHLAFEN SIE WOHL!” he kissed her
fingers and waved from the door, closing it behind him.

“He's the right sort, Thea.” Dr. Archie looked warmly after his
disappearing friend. “I've always hoped you'd make it up with Fred.”

“Well, haven't I ? Oh, marry him, you mean! Perhaps it may come about,
some day. Just at present he's not in the marriage market any more than
I am, is he ?”

“No, I suppose not. It's a damned shame that a man like Ottenburg should
be tied up as he is, wasting all the best years of his life. A woman
with general paresis ought to be legally dead.”

“Don't let us talk about Fred's wife, please. He had no business to get
into such a mess, and he had no business to stay in it. He's always been
a softy where women were concerned.”

“Most of us are, I'm afraid,” Dr. Archie admitted meekly.

“Too much light in here, isn't there ? Tires one's eyes. The stage lights
are hard on mine.” Thea began turning them out. “We'll leave the little
one, over the piano.” She sank down by Archie on the deep sofa. “We two
have so much to talk about that we keep away from it altogether; have
you noticed ? We don't even nibble the edges. I wish we had Landry here
to-night to play for us. He's very comforting.”

“I'm afraid you don't have enough personal life, outside your work,
Thea.” The doctor looked at her anxiously.

She smiled at him with her eyes half closed. “My dear doctor, I don't
have any. Your work becomes your personal life. You are not much good
until it does. It's like being woven into a big web. You can't pull
away, because all your little tendrils are woven into the picture. It
takes you up, and uses you, and spins you out; and that is your life.
Not much else can happen to you.”

“Didn't you think of marrying, several years ago ?”

“You mean Nordquist ? Yes; but I changed my mind. We had been singing a
good deal together. He's a splendid creature.”

“Were you much in love with him, Thea ?” the doctor asked hopefully.

She smiled again. “I don't think I know just what that expression means.
I've never been able to find out. I think I was in love with you when I
was little, but not with any one since then. There are a great many ways
of caring for people. It's not, after all, a simple state, like measles
or tonsilitis. Nordquist is a taking sort of man. He and I were out in a
rowboat once in a terrible storm. The lake was fed by glaciers,--ice
water,--and we couldn't have swum a stroke if the boat had filled. If we
hadn't both been strong and kept our heads, we'd have gone down. We
pulled for every ounce there was in us, and we just got off with our
lives. We were always being thrown together like that, under some kind
of pressure. Yes, for a while I thought he would make everything right.”
 She paused and sank back, resting her head on a cushion, pressing her
eyelids down with her fingers. “You see,” she went on abruptly, “he had
a wife and two children. He hadn't lived with her for several years, but
when she heard that he wanted to marry again, she began to make trouble.
He earned a good deal of money, but he was careless and always
wretchedly in debt. He came to me one day and told me he thought his
wife would settle for a hundred thousand marks and consent to a divorce.
I got very angry and sent him away. Next day he came back and said he
thought she'd take fifty thousand.”

Dr. Archie drew away from her, to the end of the sofa.

“Good God, Thea,”--He ran his handkerchief over his forehead. “What sort
of people--” He stopped and shook his head.

Thea rose and stood beside him, her hand on his shoulder. “That's
exactly how it struck me,” she said quietly. “Oh, we have things in
common, things that go away back, under everything. You understand, of
course. Nordquist didn't. He thought I wasn't willing to part with the
money. I couldn't let myself buy him from Fru Nordquist, and he couldn't
see why. He had always thought I was close about money, so he attributed
it to that. I am careful,”--she ran her arm through Archie's and when he
rose began to walk about the room with him. “I can't be careless with
money. I began the world on six hundred dollars, and it was the price of
a man's life. Ray Kennedy had worked hard and been sober and denied
himself, and when he died he had six hundred dollars to show for it. I
always measure things by that six hundred dollars, just as I measure
high buildings by the Moonstone standpipe. There are standards we can't
get away from.”

Dr. Archie took her hand. “I don't believe we should be any happier if
we did get away from them. I think it gives you some of your poise,
having that anchor. You look,” glancing down at her head and shoulders,
“sometimes so like your mother.”

“Thank you. You couldn't say anything nicer to me than that. On Friday
afternoon, didn't you think ?”

“Yes, but at other times, too. I love to see it. Do you know what I
thought about that first night when I heard you sing ? I kept remembering
the night I took care of you when you had pneumonia, when you were ten
years old. You were a terribly sick child, and I was a country doctor
without much experience. There were no oxygen tanks about then. You
pretty nearly slipped away from me. If you had--”

Thea dropped her head on his shoulder. “I'd have saved myself and you a
lot of trouble, wouldn't I ? Dear Dr. Archie!” she murmured.

“As for me, life would have been a pretty bleak stretch, with you left
out.” The doctor took one of the crystal pendants that hung from her
shoulder and looked into it thoughtfully. “I guess I'm a romantic old
fellow, underneath. And you've always been my romance. Those years when
you were growing up were my happiest. When I dream about you, I always
see you as a little girl.”

They paused by the open window. “Do you ? Nearly all my dreams, except
those about breaking down on the stage or missing trains, are about
Moonstone. You tell me the old house has been pulled down, but it stands
in my mind, every stick and timber. In my sleep I go all about it, and
look in the right drawers and cupboards for everything. I often dream
that I'm hunting for my rubbers in that pile of overshoes that was
always under the hatrack in the hall. I pick up every overshoe and know
whose it is, but I can't find my own. Then the school bell begins to
ring and I begin to cry. That's the house I rest in when I'm tired. All
the old furniture and the worn spots in the carpet--it rests my mind to
go over them.”

They were looking out of the window. Thea kept his arm. Down on the
river four battleships were anchored in line, brilliantly lighted, and
launches were coming and going, bringing the men ashore. A searchlight
from one of the ironclads was playing on the great headland up the
river, where it makes its first resolute turn. Overhead the night-blue
sky was intense and clear.

“There's so much that I want to tell you,” she said at last, “and it's
hard to explain. My life is full of jealousies and disappointments, you
know. You get to hating people who do contemptible work and who get on
just as well as you do. There are many disappointments in my profession,
and bitter, bitter contempts!” Her face hardened, and looked much older.
“If you love the good thing vitally, enough to give up for it all that
one must give up for it, then you must hate the cheap thing just as
hard. I tell you, there is such a thing as creative hate! A contempt
that drives you through fire, makes you risk everything and lose
everything, makes you a long sight better than you ever knew you could
be.” As she glanced at Dr. Archie's face, Thea stopped short and turned
her own face away. Her eyes followed the path of the searchlight up the
river and rested upon the illumined headland.

“You see,” she went on more calmly, “voices are accidental things. You
find plenty of good voices in common women, with common minds and common
hearts. Look at that woman who sang ORTRUDE with me last week. She's new
here and the people are wild about her. 'Such a beautiful volume of
tone!' they say. I give you my word she's as stupid as an owl and as
coarse as a pig, and any one who knows anything about singing would see
that in an instant. Yet she's quite as popular as Necker, who's a great
artist. How can I get much satisfaction out of the enthusiasm of a house
that likes her atrociously bad performance at the same time that it
pretends to like mine ? If they like her, then they ought to hiss me off
the stage. We stand for things that are irreconcilable, absolutely. You
can't try to do things right and not despise the people who do them
wrong. How can I be indifferent ? If that doesn't matter, then nothing
matters. Well, sometimes I've come home as I did the other night when
you first saw me, so full of bitterness that it was as if my mind were
full of daggers. And I've gone to sleep and wakened up in the Kohlers'
garden, with the pigeons and the white rabbits, so happy! And that saves
me.” She sat down on the piano bench. Archie thought she had forgotten
all about him, until she called his name. Her voice was soft now, and
wonderfully sweet. It seemed to come from somewhere deep within her,
there were such strong vibrations in it. “You see, Dr. Archie, what one
really strives for in art is not the sort of thing you are likely to
find when you drop in for a performance at the opera. What one strives
for is so far away, so deep, so beautiful”--she lifted her shoulders
with a long breath, folded her hands in her lap and sat looking at him
with a resignation that made her face noble,--“that there's nothing one
can say about it, Dr. Archie.”

Without knowing very well what it was all about, Archie was passionately
stirred for her. “I've always believed in you, Thea; always believed,”
 he muttered.

She smiled and closed her eyes. “They save me: the old things, things
like the Kohlers' garden. They are in everything I do.”

“In what you sing, you mean ?”

“Yes. Not in any direct way,”--she spoke hurriedly,--“the light, the
color, the feeling. Most of all the feeling. It comes in when I'm
working on a part, like the smell of a garden coming in at the window. I
try all the new things, and then go back to the old. Perhaps my feelings
were stronger then. A child's attitude toward everything is an artist's
attitude. I am more or less of an artist now, but then I was nothing
else. When I went with you to Chicago that first time, I carried with me
the essentials, the foundation of all I do now. The point to which I
could go was scratched in me then. I haven't reached it yet, by a long
way.”

Archie had a swift flash of memory. Pictures passed before him. “You
mean,” he asked wonderingly, “that you knew then that you were so
gifted ?”

Thea looked up at him and smiled. “Oh, I didn't know anything! Not
enough to ask you for my trunk when I needed it. But you see, when I set
out from Moonstone with you, I had had a rich, romantic past. I had
lived a long, eventful life, and an artist's life, every hour of it.
Wagner says, in his most beautiful opera, that art is only a way of
remembering youth. And the older we grow the more precious it seems to
us, and the more richly we can present that memory. When we've got it
all out,--the last, the finest thrill of it, the brightest hope of
it,”--she lifted her hand above her head and dropped it,--“then we stop.
We do nothing but repeat after that. The stream has reached the level of
its source. That's our measure.”

There was a long, warm silence. Thea was looking hard at the floor, as
if she were seeing down through years and years, and her old friend
stood watching her bent head. His look was one with which he used to
watch her long ago, and which, even in thinking about her, had become a
habit of his face. It was full of solicitude, and a kind of secret
gratitude, as if to thank her for some inexpressible pleasure of the
heart. Thea turned presently toward the piano and began softly to waken
an old air:--


     “Ca' the yowes to the knowes,
     Ca' them where the heather grows,
     Ca' them where the burnie rowes,
     My bonnie dear-ie.”


Archie sat down and shaded his eyes with his hand. She turned her head
and spoke to him over her shoulder. “Come on, you know the words better
than I. That's right.”


“We'll gae down by Clouden's side, Through the hazels spreading wide,
O'er the waves that sweetly glide, To the moon sae clearly. Ghaist nor
bogle shalt thou fear, Thou'rt to love and Heav'n sae dear, Nocht of ill
may come thee near, My bonnie dear-ie!”


“We can get on without Landry. Let's try it again, I have all the words
now. Then we'll have 'Sweet Afton.' Come: 'CA' THE YOWES TO THE
KNOWES'--”




X

OTTENBURG dismissed his taxicab at the 91st Street entrance of the Park
and floundered across the drive through a wild spring snowstorm. When he
reached the reservoir path he saw Thea ahead of him, walking rapidly
against the wind. Except for that one figure, the path was deserted. A
flock of gulls were hovering over the reservoir, seeming bewildered by
the driving currents of snow that whirled above the black water and then
disappeared within it. When he had almost overtaken Thea, Fred called to
her, and she turned and waited for him with her back to the wind. Her
hair and furs were powdered with snowflakes, and she looked like some
rich-pelted animal, with warm blood, that had run in out of the woods.
Fred laughed as he took her hand.

“No use asking how you do. You surely needn't feel much anxiety about
Friday, when you can look like this.”

She moved close to the iron fence to make room for him beside her, and
faced the wind again. “Oh, I'm WELL enough, in so far as that goes. But
I'm not lucky about stage appearances. I'm easily upset, and the most
perverse things happen.”

“What's the matter ? Do you still get nervous ?”

“Of course I do. I don't mind nerves so much as getting numbed,” Thea
muttered, sheltering her face for a moment with her muff. “I'm under a
spell, you know, hoodooed. It's the thing I WANT to do that I can never
do. Any other effects I can get easily enough.”

“Yes, you get effects, and not only with your voice. That's where you
have it over all the rest of them; you're as much at home on the stage
as you were down in Panther Canyon--as if you'd just been let out of a
cage. Didn't you get some of your ideas down there ?”

Thea nodded. “Oh, yes! For heroic parts, at least. Out of the rocks, out
of the dead people. You mean the idea of standing up under things, don't
you, meeting catastrophe ? No fussiness. Seems to me they must have been
a reserved, somber people, with only a muscular language, all their
movements for a purpose; simple, strong, as if they were dealing with
fate bare-handed.” She put her gloved fingers on Fred's arm. “I don't
know how I can ever thank you enough. I don't know if I'd ever have got
anywhere without Panther Canyon. How did you know that was the one thing
to do for me ? It's the sort of thing nobody ever helps one to, in this
world. One can learn how to sing, but no singing teacher can give
anybody what I got down there. How did you know ?”

“I didn't know. Anything else would have done as well. It was your
creative hour. I knew you were getting a lot, but I didn't realize how
much.”

Thea walked on in silence. She seemed to be thinking.

“Do you know what they really taught me ?” she came out suddenly. “They
taught me the inevitable hardness of human life. No artist gets far who
doesn't know that. And you can't know it with your mind. You have to
realize it in your body, somehow; deep. It's an animal sort of feeling.
I sometimes think it's the strongest of all. Do you know what I'm
driving at ?”

“I think so. Even your audiences feel it, vaguely: that you've sometime
or other faced things that make you different.”

Thea turned her back to the wind, wiping away the snow that clung to her
brows and lashes. “Ugh!” she exclaimed; “no matter how long a breath you
have, the storm has a longer. I haven't signed for next season, yet,
Fred. I'm holding out for a big contract: forty performances. Necker
won't be able to do much next winter. It's going to be one of those
between seasons; the old singers are too old, and the new ones are too
new. They might as well risk me as anybody. So I want good terms. The
next five or six years are going to be my best.”

“You'll get what you demand, if you are uncompromising. I'm safe in
congratulating you now.”

Thea laughed. “It's a little early. I may not get it at all. They don't
seem to be breaking their necks to meet me. I can go back to Dresden.”

As they turned the curve and walked westward they got the wind from the
side, and talking was easier.

Fred lowered his collar and shook the snow from his shoulders. “Oh, I
don't mean on the contract particularly. I congratulate you on what you
can do, Thea, and on all that lies behind what you do. On the life
that's led up to it, and on being able to care so much. That, after all,
is the unusual thing.”

She looked at him sharply, with a certain apprehension. “Care ? Why
shouldn't I care ? If I didn't, I'd be in a bad way. What else have I
got ?” She stopped with a challenging interrogation, but Ottenburg did
not reply. “You mean,” she persisted, “that you don't care as much as
you used to ?”

“I care about your success, of course.” Fred fell into a slower pace.
Thea felt at once that he was talking seriously and had dropped the tone
of half-ironical exaggeration he had used with her of late years. “And
I'm grateful to you for what you demand from yourself, when you might
get off so easily. You demand more and more all the time, and you'll do
more and more. One is grateful to anybody for that; it makes life in
general a little less sordid. But as a matter of fact, I'm not much
interested in how anybody sings anything.”

“That's too bad of you, when I'm just beginning to see what is worth
doing, and how I want to do it!” Thea spoke in an injured tone.

“That's what I congratulate you on. That's the great difference between
your kind and the rest of us. It's how long you're able to keep it up
that tells the story. When you needed enthusiasm from the outside, I was
able to give it to you. Now you must let me withdraw.”

“I'm not tying you, am I ?” she flashed out. “But withdraw to what ? What
do you want ?”

Fred shrugged. “I might ask you, What have I got ? I want things that
wouldn't interest you; that you probably wouldn't understand. For one
thing, I want a son to bring up.”

“I can understand that. It seems to me reasonable. Have you also found
somebody you want to marry ?”

“Not particularly.” They turned another curve, which brought the wind to
their backs, and they walked on in comparative calm, with the snow
blowing past them. “It's not your fault, Thea, but I've had you too much
in my mind. I've not given myself a fair chance in other directions. I
was in Rome when you and Nordquist were there. If that had kept up, it
might have cured me.”

“It might have cured a good many things,” remarked Thea grimly.

Fred nodded sympathetically and went on. “In my library in St. Louis,
over the fireplace, I have a property spear I had copied from one in
Venice,--oh, years ago, after you first went abroad, while you were
studying. You'll probably be singing BRUNNHILDE pretty soon now, and
I'll send it on to you, if I may. You can take it and its history for
what they're worth. But I'm nearly forty years old, and I've served my
turn. You've done what I hoped for you, what I was honestly willing to
lose you for--then. I'm older now, and I think I was an ass. I wouldn't
do it again if I had the chance, not much! But I'm not sorry. It takes a
great many people to make one--BRUNNHILDE.”

Thea stopped by the fence and looked over into the black choppiness on
which the snowflakes fell and disappeared with magical rapidity. Her
face was both angry and troubled. “So you really feel I've been
ungrateful. I thought you sent me out to get something. I didn't know
you wanted me to bring in something easy. I thought you wanted
something--” She took a deep breath and shrugged her shoulders. “But
there! nobody on God's earth wants it, REALLY! If one other person
wanted it,”--she thrust her hand out before him and clenched it,--“my
God, what I could do!”

Fred laughed dismally. “Even in my ashes I feel myself pushing you! How
can anybody help it ? My dear girl, can't you see that anybody else who
wanted it as you do would be your rival, your deadliest danger ? Can't
you see that it's your great good fortune that other people can't care
about it so much ?”

But Thea seemed not to take in his protest at all. She went on
vindicating herself. “It's taken me a long while to do anything, of
course, and I've only begun to see daylight. But anything good
is--expensive. It hasn't seemed long. I've always felt responsible to
you.”

Fred looked at her face intently, through the veil of snowflakes, and
shook his head. “To me ? You are a truthful woman, and you don't mean to
lie to me. But after the one responsibility you do feel, I doubt if
you've enough left to feel responsible to God! Still, if you've ever in
an idle hour fooled yourself with thinking I had anything to do with it,
Heaven knows I'm grateful.”

“Even if I'd married Nordquist,” Thea went on, turning down the path
again, “there would have been something left out. There always is. In a
way, I've always been married to you. I'm not very flexible; never was
and never shall be. You caught me young. I could never have that over
again. One can't, after one begins to know anything. But I look back on
it. My life hasn't been a gay one, any more than yours. If I shut things
out from you, you shut them out from me. We've been a help and a
hindrance to each other. I guess it's always that way, the good and the
bad all mixed up. There's only one thing that's all beautiful--and
always beautiful! That's why my interest keeps up.”

“Yes, I know.” Fred looked sidewise at the outline of her head against
the thickening atmosphere. “And you give one the impression that that is
enough. I've gradually, gradually given you up.”

“See, the lights are coming out.” Thea pointed to where they flickered,
flashes of violet through the gray tree-tops. Lower down the globes
along the drives were becoming a pale lemon color. “Yes, I don't see why
anybody wants to marry an artist, anyhow. I remember Ray Kennedy used to
say he didn't see how any woman could marry a gambler, for she would
only be marrying what the game left.” She shook her shoulders
impatiently. “Who marries who is a small matter, after all. But I hope I
can bring back your interest in my work. You've cared longer and more
than anybody else, and I'd like to have somebody human to make a report
to once in a while. You can send me your spear. I'll do my best. If
you're not interested, I'll do my best anyhow. I've only a few friends,
but I can lose every one of them, if it has to be. I learned how to lose
when my mother died.--We must hurry now. My taxi must be waiting.”

The blue light about them was growing deeper and darker, and the falling
snow and the faint trees had become violet. To the south, over Broadway,
there was an orange reflection in the clouds. Motors and carriage lights
flashed by on the drive below the reservoir path, and the air was
strident with horns and shrieks from the whistles of the mounted
policemen.

Fred gave Thea his arm as they descended from the embankment. “I guess
you'll never manage to lose me or Archie, Thea. You do pick up queer
ones. But loving you is a heroic discipline. It wears a man out. Tell me
one thing: could I have kept you, once, if I'd put on every screw ?”

Thea hurried him along, talking rapidly, as if to get it over. “You
might have kept me in misery for a while, perhaps. I don't know. I have
to think well of myself, to work. You could have made it hard. I'm not
ungrateful. I was a difficult proposition to deal with. I understand
now, of course. Since you didn't tell me the truth in the beginning, you
couldn't very well turn back after I'd set my head. At least, if you'd
been the sort who could, you wouldn't have had to,--for I'd not have
cared a button for that sort, even then.” She stopped beside a car that
waited at the curb and gave him her hand. “There. We part friends ?”

Fred looked at her. “You know. Ten years.”

“I'm not ungrateful,” Thea repeated as she got into her cab.

“Yes,” she reflected, as the taxi cut into the Park carriage road, “we
don't get fairy tales in this world, and he has, after all, cared more
and longer than anybody else.” It was dark outside now, and the light
from the lamps along the drive flashed into the cab. The snowflakes
hovered like swarms of white bees about the globes.

Thea sat motionless in one corner staring out of the window at the cab
lights that wove in and out among the trees, all seeming to be bent upon
joyous courses. Taxicabs were still new in New York, and the theme of
popular minstrelsy. Landry had sung her a ditty he heard in some theater
on Third Avenue, about:

“But there passed him a bright-eyed taxi
With the girl of his heart inside.”

Almost inaudibly Thea began to hum the air, though she was thinking of
something serious, something that had touched her deeply. At the
beginning of the season, when she was not singing often, she had gone
one afternoon to hear Paderewski's recital. In front of her sat an old
German couple, evidently poor people who had made sacrifices to pay for
their excellent seats. Their intelligent enjoyment of the music, and
their friendliness with each other, had interested her more than
anything on the programme. When the pianist began a lovely melody in the
first movement of the Beethoven D minor sonata, the old lady put out her
plump hand and touched her husband's sleeve and they looked at each
other in recognition. They both wore glasses, but such a look! Like
forget-menots, and so full of happy recollections. Thea wanted to put
her arms around them and ask them how they had been able to keep a
feeling like that, like a nosegay in a glass of water.




XI

DR. ARCHIE saw nothing of Thea during the following week. After several
fruitless efforts, he succeeded in getting a word with her over the
telephone, but she sounded so distracted and driven that he was glad to
say good-night and hang up the instrument. There were, she told him,
rehearsals not only for “Walkure,” but also for “Gotterdammerung,” in
which she was to sing WALTRAUTE two weeks later.

On Thursday afternoon Thea got home late, after an exhausting rehearsal.
She was in no happy frame of mind. Madame Necker, who had been very
gracious to her that night when she went on to complete Gloeckler's
performance of SIEGLINDE, had, since Thea was cast to sing the part
instead of Gloeckler in the production of the “Ring,” been chilly and
disapproving, distinctly hostile. Thea had always felt that she and
Necker stood for the same sort of endeavor, and that Necker recognized
it and had a cordial feeling for her. In Germany she had several times
sung BRANGAENA to Necker's ISOLDE, and the older artist had let her know
that she thought she sang it beautifully. It was a bitter disappointment
to find that the approval of so honest an artist as Necker could not
stand the test of any significant recognition by the management. Madame
Necker was forty, and her voice was failing just when her powers were at
their height. Every fresh young voice was an enemy, and this one was
accompanied by gifts which she could not fail to recognize.

Thea had her dinner sent up to her apartment, and it was a very poor
one. She tasted the soup and then indignantly put on her wraps to go out
and hunt a dinner. As she was going to the elevator, she had to admit
that she was behaving foolishly. She took off her hat and coat and
ordered another dinner. When it arrived, it was no better than the
first. There was even a burnt match under the milk toast. She had a sore
throat, which made swallowing painful and boded ill for the morrow.
Although she had been speaking in whispers all day to save her throat,
she now perversely summoned the housekeeper and demanded an account of
some laundry that had been lost. The housekeeper was indifferent and
impertinent, and Thea got angry and scolded violently. She knew it was
very bad for her to get into a rage just before bedtime, and after the
housekeeper left she realized that for ten dollars' worth of
underclothing she had been unfitting herself for a performance which
might eventually mean many thousands. The best thing now was to stop
reproaching herself for her lack of sense, but she was too tired to
control her thoughts.

While she was undressing--Therese was brushing out her SIEGLINDE wig in
the trunk-room--she went on chiding herself bitterly. “And how am I ever
going to get to sleep in this state ?” she kept asking herself. “If I
don't sleep, I'll be perfectly worthless to-morrow. I'll go down there
to-morrow and make a fool of myself. If I'd let that laundry alone with
whatever nigger has stolen it--WHY did I undertake to reform the
management of this hotel to-night ? After to-morrow I could pack up and
leave the place. There's the Phillamon--I liked the rooms there better,
anyhow--and the Umberto--” She began going over the advantages and
disadvantages of different apartment hotels. Suddenly she checked
herself. “What AM I doing this for ? I can't move into another hotel
to-night. I'll keep this up till morning. I shan't sleep a wink.”

Should she take a hot bath, or shouldn't she ? Sometimes it relaxed her,
and sometimes it roused her and fairly put her beside herself. Between
the conviction that she must sleep and the fear that she couldn't, she
hung paralyzed. When she looked at her bed, she shrank from it in every
nerve. She was much more afraid of it than she had ever been of the
stage of any opera house. It yawned before her like the sunken road at
Waterloo.

She rushed into her bathroom and locked the door. She would risk the
bath, and defer the encounter with the bed a little longer. She lay in
the bath half an hour. The warmth of the water penetrated to her bones,
induced pleasant reflections and a feeling of well-being. It was very
nice to have Dr. Archie in New York, after all, and to see him get so
much satisfaction out of the little companionship she was able to give
him. She liked people who got on, and who became more interesting as
they grew older. There was Fred; he was much more interesting now than
he had been at thirty. He was intelligent about music, and he must be
very intelligent in his business, or he would not be at the head of the
Brewers' Trust. She respected that kind of intelligence and success. Any
success was good. She herself had made a good start, at any rate, and
now, if she could get to sleep--Yes, they were all more interesting than
they used to be. Look at Harsanyi, who had been so long retarded; what a
place he had made for himself in Vienna. If she could get to sleep, she
would show him something to-morrow that he would understand.

She got quickly into bed and moved about freely between the sheets. Yes,
she was warm all over. A cold, dry breeze was coming in from the river,
thank goodness! She tried to think about her little rock house and the
Arizona sun and the blue sky. But that led to memories which were still
too disturbing. She turned on her side, closed her eyes, and tried an
old device.

She entered her father's front door, hung her hat and coat on the rack,
and stopped in the parlor to warm her hands at the stove. Then she went
out through the diningroom, where the boys were getting their lessons at
the long table; through the sitting-room, where Thor was asleep in his
cot bed, his dress and stocking hanging on a chair. In the kitchen she
stopped for her lantern and her hot brick. She hurried up the back
stairs and through the windy loft to her own glacial room. The illusion
was marred only by the consciousness that she ought to brush her teeth
before she went to bed, and that she never used to do it. Why-- ? The
water was frozen solid in the pitcher, so she got over that. Once
between the red blankets there was a short, fierce battle with the cold;
then, warmer--warmer. She could hear her father shaking down the
hard-coal burner for the night, and the wind rushing and banging down
the village street. The boughs of the cottonwood, hard as bone, rattled
against her gable. The bed grew softer and warmer. Everybody was warm
and well downstairs. The sprawling old house had gathered them all in,
like a hen, and had settled down over its brood. They were all warm in
her father's house. Softer and softer. She was asleep. She slept ten
hours without turning over. From sleep like that, one awakes in shining
armor.


On Friday afternoon there was an inspiring audience; there was not an
empty chair in the house. Ottenburg and Dr. Archie had seats in the
orchestra circle, got from a ticket broker. Landry had not been able to
get a seat, so he roamed about in the back of the house, where he
usually stood when he dropped in after his own turn in vaudeville was
over. He was there so often and at such irregular hours that the ushers
thought he was a singer's husband, or had something to do with the
electrical plant.

Harsanyi and his wife were in a box, near the stage, in the second
circle. Mrs. Harsanyi's hair was noticeably gray, but her face was
fuller and handsomer than in those early years of struggle, and she was
beautifully dressed. Harsanyi himself had changed very little. He had
put on his best afternoon coat in honor of his pupil, and wore a pearl
in his black ascot. His hair was longer and more bushy than he used to
wear it, and there was now one gray lock on the right side. He had
always been an elegant figure, even when he went about in shabby clothes
and was crushed with work. Before the curtain rose he was restless and
nervous, and kept looking at his watch and wishing he had got a few more
letters off before he left his hotel. He had not been in New York since
the advent of the taxicab, and had allowed himself too much time. His
wife knew that he was afraid of being disappointed this afternoon. He
did not often go to the opera because the stupid things that singers did
vexed him so, and it always put him in a rage if the conductor held the
tempo or in any way accommodated the score to the singer.

When the lights went out and the violins began to quaver their long D
against the rude figure of the basses, Mrs. Harsanyi saw her husband's
fingers fluttering on his knee in a rapid tattoo. At the moment when
SIEGLINDE entered from the side door, she leaned toward him and
whispered in his ear, “Oh, the lovely creature!” But he made no
response, either by voice or gesture. Throughout the first scene he sat
sunk in his chair, his head forward and his one yellow eye rolling
restlessly and shining like a tiger's in the dark. His eye followed
SIEGLINDE about the stage like a satellite, and as she sat at the table
listening to SIEGMUND'S long narrative, it never left her. When she
prepared the sleeping draught and disappeared after HUNDING, Harsanyi
bowed his head still lower and put his hand over his eye to rest it. The
tenor,--a young man who sang with great vigor, went on:--


“WALSE! WALSE! WO IST DEIN SCHWERT ?”


Harsanyi smiled, but he did not look forth again until SIEGLINDE
reappeared. She went through the story of her shameful bridal feast and
into the Walhall' music, which she always sang so nobly, and the
entrance of the one-eyed stranger:--

“MIR ALLEIN WECKTE DAS AUGE.”

Mrs. Harsanyi glanced at her husband, wondering whether the singer on
the stage could not feel his commanding glance. On came the CRESCENDO:--


“WAS JE ICH VERLOR, WAS JE ICH BEWEINT WAR' MIR GEWONNEN.”

(All that I have lost, All that I have mourned, Would I then have won.)

Harsanyi touched his wife's arm softly.

Seated in the moonlight, the VOLSUNG pair began their loving inspection
of each other's beauties, and the music born of murmuring sound passed
into her face, as the old poet said,--and into her body as well. Into
one lovely attitude after another the music swept her, love impelled
her. And the voice gave out all that was best in it. Like the spring,
indeed, it blossomed into memories and prophecies, it recounted and it
foretold, as she sang the story of her friendless life, and of how the
thing which was truly herself, “bright as the day, rose to the surface”
 when in the hostile world she for the first time beheld her Friend.
Fervently she rose into the hardier feeling of action and daring, the
pride in hero-strength and hero-blood, until in a splendid burst, tall
and shining like a Victory, she christened him:--

“SIEGMUND--SO NENN ICH DICH!”


Her impatience for the sword swelled with her anticipation of his act,
and throwing her arms above her head, she fairly tore a sword out of the
empty air for him, before NOTHUNG had left the tree. IN HOCHSTER
TRUNKENHEIT, indeed, she burst out with the flaming cry of their
kinship: “If you are SIEGMUND, I am SIEGLINDE!” Laughing, singing,
bounding, exulting,--with their passion and their sword,--the VOLSUNGS
ran out into the spring night.

As the curtain fell, Harsanyi turned to his wife. “At last,” he sighed,
“somebody with ENOUGH! Enough voice and talent and beauty, enough
physical power. And such a noble, noble style!”

“I can scarcely believe it, Andor. I can see her now, that clumsy girl,
hunched up over your piano. I can see her shoulders. She always seemed
to labor so with her back. And I shall never forget that night when you
found her voice.”

The audience kept up its clamor until, after many reappearances with the
tenor, Kronborg came before the curtain alone. The house met her with a
roar, a greeting that was almost savage in its fierceness. The singer's
eyes, sweeping the house, rested for a moment on Harsanyi, and she waved
her long sleeve toward his box.

“She OUGHT to be pleased that you are here,” said Mrs. Harsanyi. “I
wonder if she knows how much she owes to you.”

“She owes me nothing,” replied her husband quickly. “She paid her way.
She always gave something back, even then.”

“I remember you said once that she would do nothing common,” said Mrs.
Harsanyi thoughtfully.

“Just so. She might fail, die, get lost in the pack. But if she
achieved, it would be nothing common. There are people whom one can
trust for that. There is one way in which they will never fail.”
 Harsanyi retired into his own reflections.

After the second act Fred Ottenburg brought Archie to the Harsanyis' box
and introduced him as an old friend of Miss Kronborg. The head of a
musical publishing house joined them, bringing with him a journalist and
the president of a German singing society. The conversation was chiefly
about the new SIEGLINDE. Mrs. Harsanyi was gracious and enthusiastic,
her husband nervous and uncommunicative. He smiled mechanically, and
politely answered questions addressed to him. “Yes, quite so.” “Oh,
certainly.” Every one, of course, said very usual things with great
conviction. Mrs. Harsanyi was used to hearing and uttering the
commonplaces which such occasions demanded. When her husband withdrew
into the shadow, she covered his retreat by her sympathy and cordiality.
In reply to a direct question from Ottenburg, Harsanyi said, flinching,
“ISOLDE ? Yes, why not ? She will sing all the great roles, I should
think.”

The chorus director said something about “dramatic temperament.” The
journalist insisted that it was “explosive force,” “projecting power.”

Ottenburg turned to Harsanyi. “What is it, Mr. Harsanyi ? Miss Kronborg
says if there is anything in her, you are the man who can say what it
is.”

The journalist scented copy and was eager. “Yes, Harsanyi. You know all
about her. What's her secret ?”

Harsanyi rumpled his hair irritably and shrugged his shoulders. “Her
secret ? It is every artist's secret,”--he waved his hand,--“passion.
That is all. It is an open secret, and perfectly safe. Like heroism, it
is inimitable in cheap materials.”

The lights went out. Fred and Archie left the box as the second act came
on.

Artistic growth is, more than it is anything else, a refining of the
sense of truthfulness. The stupid believe that to be truthful is easy;
only the artist, the great artist, knows how difficult it is. That
afternoon nothing new came to Thea Kronborg, no enlightenment, no
inspiration. She merely came into full possession of things she had been
refining and perfecting for so long. Her inhibitions chanced to be fewer
than usual, and, within herself, she entered into the inheritance that
she herself had laid up, into the fullness of the faith she had kept
before she knew its name or its meaning.

Often when she sang, the best she had was unavailable; she could not
break through to it, and every sort of distraction and mischance came
between it and her. But this afternoon the closed roads opened, the
gates dropped. What she had so often tried to reach, lay under her hand.
She had only to touch an idea to make it live.

While she was on the stage she was conscious that every movement was the
right movement, that her body was absolutely the instrument of her idea.
Not for nothing had she kept it so severely, kept it filled with such
energy and fire. All that deep-rooted vitality flowered in her voice,
her face, in her very finger-tips. She felt like a tree bursting into
bloom. And her voice was as flexible as her body; equal to any demand,
capable of every NUANCE. With the sense of its perfect companionship,
its entire trustworthiness, she had been able to throw herself into the
dramatic exigencies of the part, everything in her at its best and
everything working together.

The third act came on, and the afternoon slipped by. Thea Kronborg's
friends, old and new, seated about the house on different floors and
levels, enjoyed her triumph according to their natures. There was one
there, whom nobody knew, who perhaps got greater pleasure out of that
afternoon than Harsanyi himself. Up in the top gallery a gray-haired
little Mexican, withered and bright as a string of peppers beside a'dobe
door, kept praying and cursing under his breath, beating on the brass
railing and shouting “Bravo! Bravo!” until he was repressed by his
neighbors.

He happened to be there because a Mexican band was to be a feature of
Barnum and Bailey's circus that year. One of the managers of the show
had traveled about the Southwest, signing up a lot of Mexican musicians
at low wages, and had brought them to New York. Among them was Spanish
Johnny. After Mrs. Tellamantez died, Johnny abandoned his trade and went
out with his mandolin to pick up a living for one. His irregularities
had become his regular mode of life.

When Thea Kronborg came out of the stage entrance on Fortieth Street,
the sky was still flaming with the last rays of the sun that was sinking
off behind the North River. A little crowd of people was lingering about
the door--musicians from the orchestra who were waiting for their
comrades, curious young men, and some poorly dressed girls who were
hoping to get a glimpse of the singer. She bowed graciously to the
group, through her veil, but she did not look to the right or left as
she crossed the sidewalk to her cab. Had she lifted her eyes an instant
and glanced out through her white scarf, she must have seen the only man
in the crowd who had removed his hat when she emerged, and who stood
with it crushed up in his hand. And she would have known him, changed as
he was. His lustrous black hair was full of gray, and his face was a
good deal worn by the EXTASI, so that it seemed to have shrunk away from
his shining eyes and teeth and left them too prominent. But she would
have known him. She passed so near that he could have touched her, and
he did not put on his hat until her taxi had snorted away. Then he
walked down Broadway with his hands in his overcoat pockets, wearing a
smile which embraced all the stream of life that passed him and the
lighted towers that rose into the limpid blue of the evening sky. If the
singer, going home exhausted in her cab, was wondering what was the good
of it all, that smile, could she have seen it, would have answered her.
It is the only commensurate answer.


Here we must leave Thea Kronborg. From this time on the story of her
life is the story of her achievement. The growth of an artist is an
intellectual and spiritual development which can scarcely be followed in
a personal narrative. This story attempts to deal only with the simple
and concrete beginnings which color and accent an artist's work, and to
give some account of how a Moonstone girl found her way out of a vague,
easy-going world into a life of disciplined endeavor. Any account of the
loyalty of young hearts to some exalted ideal, and the passion with
which they strive, will always, in some of us, rekindle generous
emotions.




EPILOGUE

MOONSTONE again, in the year 1909. The Methodists are giving an
ice-cream sociable in the grove about the new court-house. It is a warm
summer night of full moon. The paper lanterns which hang among the trees
are foolish toys, only dimming, in little lurid circles, the great
softness of the lunar light that floods the blue heavens and the high
plateau. To the east the sand hills shine white as of old, but the
empire of the sand is gradually diminishing. The grass grows thicker
over the dunes than it used to, and the streets of the town are harder
and firmer than they were twenty-five years ago. The old inhabitants
will tell you that sandstorms are infrequent now, that the wind blows
less persistently in the spring and plays a milder tune. Cultivation has
modified the soil and the climate, as it modifies human life.

The people seated about under the cottonwoods are much smarter than the
Methodists we used to know. The interior of the new Methodist Church
looks like a theater, with a sloping floor, and as the congregation
proudly say, “opera chairs.” The matrons who attend to serving the
refreshments to-night look younger for their years than did the women of
Mrs. Kronborg's time, and the children all look like city children. The
little boys wear “Buster Browns” and the little girls Russian blouses.
The country child, in made-overs and cut-downs, seems to have vanished
from the face of the earth.

At one of the tables, with her Dutch-cut twin boys, sits a fair-haired,
dimpled matron who was once Lily Fisher. Her husband is president of the
new bank, and she “goes East for her summers,” a practice which causes
envy and discontent among her neighbors. The twins are well-behaved
children, biddable, meek, neat about their clothes, and always mindful
of the proprieties they have learned at summer hotels. While they are
eating their icecream and trying not to twist the spoon in their mouths,
a little shriek of laughter breaks from an adjacent table. The twins
look up. There sits a spry little old spinster whom they know well. She
has a long chin, a long nose, and she is dressed like a young girl, with
a pink sash and a lace garden hat with pink rosebuds. She is surrounded
by a crowd of boys,--loose and lanky, short and thick,--who are joking
with her roughly, but not unkindly.

“Mamma,” one of the twins comes out in a shrill treble, “why is Tillie
Kronborg always talking about a thousand dollars ?”

The boys, hearing this question, break into a roar of laughter, the
women titter behind their paper napkins, and even from Tillie there is a
little shriek of appreciation. The observing child's remark had made
every one suddenly realize that Tillie never stopped talking about that
particular sum of money. In the spring, when she went to buy early
strawberries, and was told that they were thirty cents a box, she was
sure to remind the grocer that though her name was Kronborg she didn't
get a thousand dollars a night. In the autumn, when she went to buy her
coal for the winter, she expressed amazement at the price quoted her,
and told the dealer he must have got her mixed up with her niece to
think she could pay such a sum. When she was making her Christmas
presents, she never failed to ask the women who came into her shop what
you COULD make for anybody who got a thousand dollars a night. When the
Denver papers announced that Thea Kronborg had married Frederick
Ottenburg, the head of the Brewers' Trust, Moonstone people expected
that Tillie's vain-gloriousness would take another form. But Tillie had
hoped that Thea would marry a title, and she did not boast much about
Ottenburg,--at least not until after her memorable trip to Kansas City
to hear Thea sing.

Tillie is the last Kronborg left in Moonstone. She lives alone in a
little house with a green yard, and keeps a fancywork and millinery
store. Her business methods are informal, and she would never come out
even at the end of the year, if she did not receive a draft for a good
round sum from her niece at Christmas time. The arrival of this draft
always renews the discussion as to what Thea would do for her aunt if
she really did the right thing. Most of the Moonstone people think Thea
ought to take Tillie to New York and keep her as a companion. While they
are feeling sorry for Tillie because she does not live at the Plaza,
Tillie is trying not to hurt their feelings by showing too plainly how
much she realizes the superiority of her position. She tries to be
modest when she complains to the postmaster that her New York paper is
more than three days late. It means enough, surely, on the face of it,
that she is the only person in Moonstone who takes a New York paper or
who has any reason for taking one. A foolish young girl, Tillie lived in
the splendid sorrows of “Wanda” and “Strathmore”; a foolish old girl,
she lives in her niece's triumphs. As she often says, she just missed
going on the stage herself.

That night after the sociable, as Tillie tripped home with a crowd of
noisy boys and girls, she was perhaps a shade troubled. The twin's
question rather lingered in her ears. Did she, perhaps, insist too much
on that thousand dollars ? Surely, people didn't for a minute think it
was the money she cared about ? As for that, Tillie tossed her head, she
didn't care a rap. They must understand that this money was different.

When the laughing little group that brought her home had gone weaving
down the sidewalk through the leafy shadows and had disappeared, Tillie
brought out a rocking chair and sat down on her porch. On glorious, soft
summer nights like this, when the moon is opulent and full, the day
submerged and forgotten, she loves to sit there behind her rose-vine and
let her fancy wander where it will. If you chanced to be passing down
that Moonstone street and saw that alert white figure rocking there
behind the screen of roses and lingering late into the night, you might
feel sorry for her, and how mistaken you would be! Tillie lives in a
little magic world, full of secret satisfactions. Thea Kronborg has
given much noble pleasure to a world that needs all it can get, but to
no individual has she given more than to her queer old aunt in
Moonstone. The legend of Kronborg, the artist, fills Tillie's life; she
feels rich and exalted in it. What delightful things happen in her mind
as she sits there rocking! She goes back to those early days of sand and
sun, when Thea was a child and Tillie was herself, so it seems to her,
“young.” When she used to hurry to church to hear Mr. Kronborg's
wonderful sermons, and when Thea used to stand up by the organ of a
bright Sunday morning and sing “Come, Ye Disconsolate.” Or she thinks
about that wonderful time when the Metropolitan Opera Company sang a
week's engagement in Kansas City, and Thea sent for her and had her stay
with her at the Coates House and go to every performance at Convention
Hall. Thea let Tillie go through her costume trunks and try on her wigs
and jewels. And the kindness of Mr. Ottenburg! When Thea dined in her
own room, he went down to dinner with Tillie, and never looked bored or
absent-minded when she chattered. He took her to the hall the first time
Thea sang there, and sat in the box with her and helped her through
“Lohengrin.” After the first act, when Tillie turned tearful eyes to him
and burst out, “I don't care, she always seemed grand like that, even
when she was a girl. I expect I'm crazy, but she just seems to me full
of all them old times!”--Ottenburg was so sympathetic and patted her
hand and said, “But that's just what she is, full of the old times, and
you are a wise woman to see it.” Yes, he said that to her. Tillie often
wondered how she had been able to bear it when Thea came down the stairs
in the wedding robe embroidered in silver, with a train so long it took
six women to carry it.

Tillie had lived fifty-odd years for that week, but she got it, and no
miracle was ever more miraculous than that. When she used to be working
in the fields on her father's Minnesota farm, she couldn't help
believing that she would some day have to do with the “wonderful,”
 though her chances for it had then looked so slender.

The morning after the sociable, Tillie, curled up in bed, was roused by
the rattle of the milk cart down the street. Then a neighbor boy came
down the sidewalk outside her window, singing “Casey Jones” as if he
hadn't a care in the world. By this time Tillie was wide awake. The
twin's question, and the subsequent laughter, came back with a faint
twinge. Tillie knew she was short-sighted about facts, but this
time--Why, there were her scrapbooks, full of newspaper and magazine
articles about Thea, and half-tone cuts, snap-shots of her on land and
sea, and photographs of her in all her parts. There, in her parlor, was
the phonograph that had come from Mr. Ottenburg last June, on Thea's
birthday; she had only to go in there and turn it on, and let Thea speak
for herself. Tillie finished brushing her white hair and laughed as she
gave it a smart turn and brought it into her usual French twist. If
Moonstone doubted, she had evidence enough: in black and white, in
figures and photographs, evidence in hair lines on metal disks. For one
who had so often seen two and two as making six, who had so often
stretched a point, added a touch, in the good game of trying to make the
world brighter than it is, there was positive bliss in having such deep
foundations of support. She need never tremble in secret lest she might
sometime stretch a point in Thea's favor.--Oh, the comfort, to a soul
too zealous, of having at last a rose so red it could not be further
painted, a lily so truly auriferous that no amount of gilding could
exceed the fact!

Tillie hurried from her bedroom, threw open the doors and windows, and
let the morning breeze blow through her little house.

In two minutes a cob fire was roaring in her kitchen stove, in five she
had set the table. At her household work Tillie was always bursting out
with shrill snatches of song, and as suddenly stopping, right in the
middle of a phrase, as if she had been struck dumb. She emerged upon the
back porch with one of these bursts, and bent down to get her butter and
cream out of the ice-box. The cat was purring on the bench and the
morning-glories were thrusting their purple trumpets in through the
lattice-work in a friendly way. They reminded Tillie that while she was
waiting for the coffee to boil she could get some flowers for her
breakfast table. She looked out uncertainly at a bush of sweet-briar
that grew at the edge of her yard, off across the long grass and the
tomato vines. The front porch, to be sure, was dripping with crimson
ramblers that ought to be cut for the good of the vines; but never the
rose in the hand for Tillie! She caught up the kitchen shears and off
she dashed through grass and drenching dew. Snip, snip; the
short-stemmed sweet-briars, salmon-pink and golden-hearted, with their
unique and inimitable woody perfume, fell into her apron.

After she put the eggs and toast on the table, Tillie took last Sunday's
New York paper from the rack beside the cupboard and sat down, with it
for company. In the Sunday paper there was always a page about singers,
even in summer, and that week the musical page began with a sympathetic
account of Madame Kronborg's first performance of ISOLDE in London. At
the end of the notice, there was a short paragraph about her having sung
for the King at Buckingham Palace and having been presented with a jewel
by His Majesty.

Singing for the King; but Goodness! she was always doing things like
that! Tillie tossed her head. All through breakfast she kept sticking
her sharp nose down into the glass of sweet-briar, with the old
incredible lightness of heart, like a child's balloon tugging at its
string. She had always insisted, against all evidence, that life was
full of fairy tales, and it was! She had been feeling a little down,
perhaps, and Thea had answered her, from so far. From a common person,
now, if you were troubled, you might get a letter. But Thea almost never
wrote letters. She answered every one, friends and foes alike, in one
way, her own way, her only way. Once more Tillie has to remind herself
that it is all true, and is not something she has “made up.” Like all
romancers, she is a little terrified at seeing one of her wildest
conceits admitted by the hardheaded world. If our dream comes true, we
are almost afraid to believe it; for that is the best of all good
fortune, and nothing better can happen to any of us.

When the people on Sylvester Street tire of Tillie's stories, she goes
over to the east part of town, where her legends are always welcome. The
humbler people of Moonstone still live there. The same little houses sit
under the cottonwoods; the men smoke their pipes in the front doorways,
and the women do their washing in the back yard. The older women
remember Thea, and how she used to come kicking her express wagon along
the sidewalk, steering by the tongue and holding Thor in her lap. Not
much happens in that part of town, and the people have long memories. A
boy grew up on one of those streets who went to Omaha and built up a
great business, and is now very rich. Moonstone people always speak of
him and Thea together, as examples of Moonstone enterprise. They do,
however, talk oftener of Thea. A voice has even a wider appeal than a
fortune. It is the one gift that all creatures would possess if they
could. Dreary Maggie Evans, dead nearly twenty years, is still
remembered because Thea sang at her funeral “after she had studied in
Chicago.”

However much they may smile at her, the old inhabitants would miss
Tillie. Her stories give them something to talk about and to conjecture
about, cut off as they are from the restless currents of the world. The
many naked little sandbars which lie between Venice and the mainland, in
the seemingly stagnant water of the lagoons, are made habitable and
wholesome only because, every night, a foot and a half of tide creeps in
from the sea and winds its fresh brine up through all that network of
shining waterways. So, into all the little settlements of quiet people,
tidings of what their boys and girls are doing in the world bring real
refreshment; bring to the old, memories, and to the young, dreams.

THE END


On the Divide


Near Rattlesnake Creek, on the side of a little draw stood Canute's
shanty. North, east, south, stretched the level Nebraska plain of long
rust-red grass that undulated constantly in the wind. To the west the
ground was broken and rough, and a narrow strip of timber wound along
the turbid, muddy little stream that had scarcely ambition enough to
crawl over its black bottom. If it had not been for the few stunted
cottonwoods and elms that grew along its banks, Canute would have shot
himself years ago. The Norwegians are a timber-loving people, and if
there is even a turtle pond with a few plum bushes around it they seem
irresistibly drawn toward it.

As to the shanty itself, Canute had built it without aid of any kind,
for when he first squatted along the banks of Rattlesnake Creek there
was not a human being within twenty miles. It was built of logs split
in halves, the chinks stopped with mud and plaster. The roof was covered
with earth and was supported by one gigantic beam curved in the shape of
a round arch. It was almost impossible that any tree had ever grown in
that shape. The Norwegians used to say that Canute had taken the log
across his knee and bent it into the shape he wished. There were
two rooms, or rather there was one room with a partition made of ash
saplings interwoven and bound together like big straw basket work. In
one corner there was a cook stove, rusted and broken. In the other a
bed made of unplaned planks and poles. It was fully eight feet long, and
upon it was a heap of dark bed clothing. There was a chair and a bench
of colossal proportions. There was an ordinary kitchen cupboard with
a few cracked dirty dishes in it, and beside it on a tall box a tin
washbasin. Under the bed was a pile of pint flasks, some broken,
some whole, all empty. On the wood box lay a pair of shoes of almost
incredible dimensions. On the wall hung a saddle, a gun, and some ragged
clothing, conspicuous among which was a suit of dark cloth, apparently
new, with a paper collar carefully wrapped in a red silk handkerchief
and pinned to the sleeve. Over the door hung a wolf and a badger skin,
and on the door itself a brace of thirty or forty snake skins whose
noisy tails rattled ominously every time it opened. The strangest things
in the shanty were the wide windowsills. At first glance they looked as
though they had been ruthlessly hacked and mutilated with a hatchet, but
on closer inspection all the notches and holes in the wood took form and
shape. There seemed to be a series of pictures. They were, in a rough
way, artistic, but the figures were heavy and labored, as though they
had been cut very slowly and with very awkward instruments. There were
men plowing with little horned imps sitting on their shoulders and on
their horses' heads. There were men praying with a skull hanging over
their heads and little demons behind them mocking their attitudes. There
were men fighting with big serpents, and skeletons dancing together. All
about these pictures were blooming vines and foliage such as never grew
in this world, and coiled among the branches of the vines there was
always the scaly body of a serpent, and behind every flower there was
a serpent's head. It was a veritable Dance of Death by one who had felt
its sting. In the wood box lay some boards, and every inch of them
was cut up in the same manner. Sometimes the work was very rude and
careless, and looked as though the hand of the workman had trembled. It
would sometimes have been hard to distinguish the men from their evil
geniuses but for one fact, the men were always grave and were either
toiling or praying, while the devils were always smiling and dancing.
Several of these boards had been split for kindling and it was evident
that the artist did not value his work highly.

It was the first day of winter on the Divide. Canute stumbled into his
shanty carrying a basket of cobs, and after filling the stove, sat
down on a stool and crouched his seven foot frame over the fire, staring
drearily out of the window at the wide gray sky. He knew by heart every
individual clump of bunch grass in the miles of red shaggy prairie that
stretched before his cabin. He knew it in all the deceitful loveliness
of its early summer, in all the bitter barrenness of its autumn. He had
seen it smitten by all the plagues of Egypt. He had seen it parched by
drought, and sogged by rain, beaten by hail, and swept by fire, and in
the grasshopper years he had seen it eaten as bare and clean as bones
that the vultures have left. After the great fires he had seen it
stretch for miles and miles, black and smoking as the floor of hell.

He rose slowly and crossed the room, dragging his big feet heavily as
though they were burdens to him. He looked out of the window into the
hog corral and saw the pigs burying themselves in the straw before the
shed. The leaden gray clouds were beginning to spill themselves, and the
snow flakes were settling down over the white leprous patches of frozen
earth where the hogs had gnawed even the sod away. He shuddered and
began to walk, trampling heavily with his ungainly feet. He was the
wreck of ten winters on the Divide and he knew what that meant. Men fear
the winters of the Divide as a child fears night or as men in the North
Seas fear the still dark cold of the polar twilight. His eyes fell upon
his gun, and he took it down from the wall and looked it over. He
sat down on the edge of his bed and held the barrel towards his face,
letting his forehead rest upon it, and laid his finger on the trigger.
He was perfectly calm, there was neither passion nor despair in his
face, but the thoughtful look of a man who is considering. Presently
he laid down the gun, and reaching into the cupboard, drew out a pint
bottle of raw white alcohol. Lifting it to his lips, he drank greedily.
He washed his face in the tin basin and combed his rough hair and
shaggy blond beard. Then he stood in uncertainty before the suit of dark
clothes that hung on the wall. For the fiftieth time he took them in
his hands and tried to summon courage to put them on. He took the paper
collar that was pinned to the sleeve of the coat and cautiously slipped
it under his rough beard, looking with timid expectancy into the
cracked, splashed glass that hung over the bench. With a short laugh he
threw it down on the bed, and pulling on his old black hat, he went out,
striking off across the level.

It was a physical necessity for him to get away from his cabin once in a
while. He had been there for ten years, digging and plowing and sowing,
and reaping what little the hail and the hot winds and the frosts left
him to reap. Insanity and suicide are very common things on the Divide.
They come on like an epidemic in the hot wind season. Those scorching
dusty winds that blow up over the bluffs from Kansas seem to dry up the
blood in men's veins as they do the sap in the corn leaves. Whenever the
yellow scorch creeps down over the tender inside leaves about the ear,
then the coroners prepare for active duty; for the oil of the country is
burned out and it does not take long for the flame to eat up the wick.
It causes no great sensation there when a Dane is found swinging to his
own windmill tower, and most of the Poles after they have become too
careless and discouraged to shave themselves keep their razors to cut
their throats with.

It may be that the next generation on the Divide will be very happy, but
the present one came too late in life. It is useless for men that have
cut hemlocks among the mountains of Sweden for forty years to try to be
happy in a country as flat and gray and naked as the sea. It is not easy
for men that have spent their youth fishing in the Northern seas to be
content with following a plow, and men that have served in the Austrian
army hate hard work and coarse clothing on the loneliness of the plains,
and long for marches and excitement and tavern company and pretty
barmaids. After a man has passed his fortieth birthday it is not easy
for him to change the habits and conditions of his life. Most men bring
with them to the Divide only the dregs of the lives that they have
squandered in other lands and among other peoples.

Canute Canuteson was as mad as any of them, but his madness did not
take the form of suicide or religion but of alcohol. He had always taken
liquor when he wanted it, as all Norwegians do, but after his first year
of solitary life he settled down to it steadily. He exhausted whisky
after a while, and went to alcohol, because its effects were speedier
and surer. He was a big man and with a terrible amount of resistant
force, and it took a great deal of alcohol even to move him. After nine
years of drinking, the quantities he could take would seem fabulous to
an ordinary drinking man. He never let it interfere with his work, he
generally drank at night and on Sundays. Every night, as soon as his
chores were done, he began to drink. While he was able to sit up he
would play on his mouth harp or hack away at his window sills with his
jackknife. When the liquor went to his head he would lie down on his bed
and stare out of the window until he went to sleep. He drank alone and
in solitude not for pleasure or good cheer, but to forget the awful
loneliness and level of the Divide. Milton made a sad blunder when he
put mountains in hell. Mountains postulate faith and aspiration. All
mountain peoples are religious. It was the cities of the plains that,
because of their utter lack of spirituality and the mad caprice of their
vice, were cursed of God.

Alcohol is perfectly consistent in its effects upon man. Drunkenness is
merely an exaggeration. A foolish man drunk becomes maudlin; a bloody
man, vicious; a coarse man, vulgar. Canute was none of these, but he was
morose and gloomy, and liquor took him through all the hells of Dante.
As he lay on his giant's bed all the horrors of this world and every
other were laid bare to his chilled senses. He was a man who knew no
joy, a man who toiled in silence and bitterness. The skull and the
serpent were always before him, the symbols of eternal futileness and of
eternal hate.

When the first Norwegians near enough to be called neighbors came,
Canute rejoiced, and planned to escape from his bosom vice. But he was
not a social man by nature and had not the power of drawing out the
social side of other people. His new neighbors rather feared him because
of his great strength and size, his silence and his lowering brows.
Perhaps, too, they knew that he was mad, mad from the eternal treachery
of the plains, which every spring stretch green and rustle with the
promises of Eden, showing long grassy lagoons full of clear water
and cattle whose hoofs are stained with wild roses. Before autumn the
lagoons are dried up, and the ground is burnt dry and hard until it
blisters and cracks open.

So instead of becoming a friend and neighbor to the men that settled
about him, Canute became a mystery and a terror. They told awful stories
of his size and strength and of the alcohol he drank.

They said that one night, when he went out to see to his horses just
before he went to bed, his steps were unsteady and the rotten planks
of the floor gave way and threw him behind the feet of a fiery young
stallion. His foot was caught fast in the floor, and the nervous horse
began kicking frantically. When Canute felt the blood trickling down
into his eyes from a scalp wound in his head, he roused himself from his
kingly indifference, and with the quiet stoical courage of a drunken man
leaned forward and wound his arms about the horse's hind legs and held
them against his breast with crushing embrace. All through the darkness
and cold of the night he lay there, matching strength against strength.
When little Jim Peterson went over the next morning at four o'clock to
go with him to the Blue to cut wood, he found him so, and the horse was
on its fore knees, trembling and whinnying with fear. This is the story
the Norwegians tell of him, and if it is true it is no wonder that they
feared and hated this Holder of the Heels of Horses.

One spring there moved to the next “eighty” a family that made a great
change in Canute's life. Ole Yensen was too drunk most of the time to be
afraid of any one, and his wife Mary was too garrulous to be afraid of
any one who listened to her talk, and Lena, their pretty daughter, was
not afraid of man nor devil. So it came about that Canute went over to
take his alcohol with Ole oftener than he took it alone, After a while
the report spread that he was going to marry Yensen's daughter, and the
Norwegian girls began to tease Lena about the great bear she was going
to keep house for. No one could quite see how the affair had come about,
for Canute's tactics of courtship were somewhat peculiar. He apparently
never spoke to her at all: he would sit for hours with Mary chattering
on one side of him and Ole drinking on the other and watch Lena at her
work. She teased him, and threw flour in his face and put vinegar in
his coffee, but he took her rough jokes with silent wonder, never even
smiling. He took her to church occasionally, but the most watchful and
curious people never saw him speak to her. He would sit staring at her
while she giggled and flirted with the other men.

Next spring Mary Lee went to town to work in a steam laundry. She came
home every Sunday, and always ran across to Yensens to startle Lena
with stories of ten cent theaters, firemen's dances, and all the other
esthetic delights of metropolitan life. In a few weeks Lena's head was
completely turned, and she gave her father no rest until he let her go
to town to seek her fortune at the ironing board. From the time she came
home on her first visit she began to treat Canute with contempt. She had
bought a plush cloak and kid gloves, had her clothes made by the dress
maker, and assumed airs and graces that made the other women of the
neighborhood cordially detest her. She generally brought with her a
young man from town who waxed his mustache and wore a red necktie, and
she did not even introduce him to Canute.

The neighbors teased Canute a good deal until he knocked one of them
down. He gave no sign of suffering from her neglect except that he drank
more and avoided the other Norwegians more carefully than ever, He lay
around in his den and no one knew what he felt or thought, but little
Jim Peterson, who had seen him glowering at Lena in church one Sunday
when she was there with the town man, said that he would not give an
acre of his wheat for Lena's life or the town chap's either; and Jim's
wheat was so wondrously worthless that the statement was an exceedingly
strong one.

Canute had bought a new suit of clothes that looked as nearly like the
town man as possible. They had cost him half a millet crop; for
tailors are not accustomed to fitting giants and they charge for it. He
had hung those clothes in his shanty two months ago and had never put
them on, partly from fear of ridicule, partly from discouragement, and
partly because there was something in his own soul that revolted at the
littleness of the device.

Lena was at home just at this time. Work was slack in the laundry and
Mary had not been well, so Lena stayed at home, glad enough to get an
opportunity to torment Canute once more.

She was washing in the side kitchen, singing loudly as she worked. Mary
was on her knees, blacking the stove and scolding violently about the
young man who was coming out from town that night. The young man had
committed the fatal error of laughing at Mary's ceaseless babble and had
never been forgiven.

“He is no good, and you will come to a bad end by running with him! I do
not see why a daughter of mine should act so. I do not see why the Lord
should visit such a punishment upon me as to give me such a daughter.
There are plenty of good men you can marry.”

Lena tossed her head and answered curtly, “I don't happen to want to
marry any man right away, and so long as Dick dresses nice and has
plenty of money to spend, there is no harm in my going with him.”

“Money to spend ? Yes, and that is all he does with it I'll be bound. You
think it very fine now, but you will change your tune when you have been
married five years and see your children running naked and your cupboard
empty. Did Anne Hermanson come to any good end by marrying a town man ?”

“I don't know anything about Anne Hermanson, but I know any of the
laundry girls would have Dick quick enough if they could get him.”

“Yes, and a nice lot of store clothes huzzies you are too. Now there is
Canuteson who has an 'eighty' proved up and fifty head of cattle and--”

“And hair that ain't been cut since he was a baby, and a big dirty
beard, and he wears overalls on Sundays, and drinks like a pig. Besides
he will keep. I can have all the fun I want, and when I am old and ugly
like you he can have me and take care of me. The Lord knows there ain't
nobody else going to marry him.”

Canute drew his hand back from the latch as though it were red hot. He
was not the kind of man to make a good eavesdropper, and he wished he
had knocked sooner. He pulled himself together and struck the door like
a battering ram. Mary jumped and opened it with a screech.

“God! Canute, how you scared us! I thought it was crazy Lou--he has been
tearing around the neighborhood trying to convert folks. I am afraid as
death of him. He ought to be sent off, I think. He is just as liable as
not to kill us all, or burn the barn, or poison the dogs. He has been
worrying even the poor minister to death, and he laid up with the
rheumatism, too! Did you notice that he was too sick to preach last
Sunday ? But don't stand there in the cold, come in. Yensen isn't here,
but he just went over to Sorenson's for the mail; he won't be gone long.
Walk right in the other room and sit down.”

Canute followed her, looking steadily in front of him and not noticing
Lena as he passed her. But Lena's vanity would not allow him to pass
unmolested. She took the wet sheet she was wringing out and cracked him
across the face with it, and ran giggling to the other side of the room.
The blow stung his cheeks and the soapy water flew in his eyes, and
he involuntarily began rubbing them with his hands. Lena giggled with
delight at his discomfiture, and the wrath in Canute's face grew blacker
than ever. A big man humiliated is vastly more undignified than a little
one. He forgot the sting of his face in the bitter consciousness that
he had made a fool of himself He stumbled blindly into the living room,
knocking his head against the door jamb because he forgot to stoop.
He dropped into a chair behind the stove, thrusting his big feet back
helplessly on either side of him.

Ole was a long time in coming, and Canute sat there, still and silent,
with his hands clenched on his knees, and the skin of his face seemed to
have shriveled up into little wrinkles that trembled when he lowered his
brows. His life had been one long lethargy of solitude and alcohol,
but now he was awakening, and it was as when the dumb stagnant heat of
summer breaks out into thunder.

When Ole came staggering in, heavy with liquor, Canute rose at once.

“Yensen,” he said quietly, “I have come to see if you will let me marry
your daughter today.”

“Today!” gasped Ole.

“Yes, I will not wait until tomorrow. I am tired of living alone.”

Ole braced his staggering knees against the bedstead, and stammered
eloquently: “Do you think I will marry my daughter to a drunkard ? a man
who drinks raw alcohol ? a man who sleeps with rattle snakes ? Get out
of my house or I will kick you out for your impudence.” And Ole began
looking anxiously for his feet.

Canute answered not a word, but he put on his hat and went out into the
kitchen. He went up to Lena and said without looking at her, “Get your
things on and come with me!”

The tones of his voice startled her, and she said angrily, dropping the
soap, “Are you drunk ?”

“If you do not come with me, I will take you--you had better come,” said
Canute quietly.

She lifted a sheet to strike him, but he caught her arm roughly and
wrenched the sheet from her. He turned to the wall and took down a hood
and shawl that hung there, and began wrapping her up. Lena scratched
and fought like a wild thing. Ole stood in the door, cursing, and Mary
howled and screeched at the top of her voice. As for Canute, he
lifted the girl in his arms and went out of the house. She kicked and
struggled, but the helpless wailing of Mary and Ole soon died away in
the distance, and her face was held down tightly on Canute's shoulder so
that she could not see whither he was taking her. She was conscious only
of the north wind whistling in her ears, and of rapid steady motion and
of a great breast that heaved beneath her in quick, irregular breaths.
The harder she struggled the tighter those iron arms that had held the
heels of horses crushed about her, until she felt as if they would crush
the breath from her, and lay still with fear. Canute was striding across
the level fields at a pace at which man never went before, drawing the
stinging north winds into his lungs in great gulps. He walked with his
eyes half closed and looking straight in front of him, only lowering
them when he bent his head to blow away the snow flakes that settled
on her hair. So it was that Canute took her to his home, even as his
bearded barbarian ancestors took the fair frivolous women of the South
in their hairy arms and bore them down to their war ships. For ever and
anon the soul becomes weary of the conventions that are not of it, and
with a single stroke shatters the civilized lies with which it is unable
to cope, and the strong arm reaches out and takes by force what it
cannot win by cunning.

When Canute reached his shanty he placed the girl upon a chair, where
she sat sobbing. He stayed only a few minutes. He filled the stove
with wood and lit the lamp, drank a huge swallow of alcohol and put the
bottle in his pocket. He paused a moment, staring heavily at the weeping
girl, then he went off and locked the door and disappeared in the
gathering gloom of the night.

Wrapped in flannels and soaked with turpentine, the little Norwegian
preacher sat reading his Bible, when he heard a thundering knock at his
door, and Canute entered, covered with snow and his beard frozen fast to
his coat.

“Come in, Canute, you must be frozen,” said the little man, shoving a
chair towards his visitor.

Canute remained standing with his hat on and said quietly, “I want you
to come over to my house tonight to marry me to Lena Yensen.”

“Have you got a license, Canute ?”

“No, I don't want a license. I want to be married.”

“But I can't marry you without a license, man, it would not be legal.”

A dangerous light came in the big Norwegian's eye. “I want you to come
over to my house to marry me to Lena Yensen.”

“No, I can't, it would kill an ox to go out in a storm like this, and my
rheumatism is bad tonight.”

“Then if you will not go I must take you,” said Canute with a sigh.

He took down the preacher's bearskin coat and bade him put it on while
he hitched up his buggy. He went out and closed the door softly after
him. Presently he returned and found the frightened minister crouching
before the fire with his coat lying beside him. Canute helped him put it
on and gently wrapped his head in his big muffler. Then he picked him
up and carried him out and placed him in his buggy. As he tucked the
buffalo robes around him he said: “Your horse is old, he might flounder
or lose his way in this storm. I will lead him.”

The minister took the reins feebly in his hands and sat shivering with
the cold. Sometimes when there was a lull in the wind, he could see the
horse struggling through the snow with the man plodding steadily beside
him. Again the blowing snow would hide them from him altogether. He had
no idea where they were or what direction they were going. He felt as
though he were being whirled away in the heart of the storm, and he said
all the prayers he knew. But at last the long four miles were over, and
Canute set him down in the snow while he unlocked the door. He saw the
bride sitting by the fire with her eyes red and swollen as though
she had been weeping. Canute placed a huge chair for him, and said
roughly,--

“Warm yourself.”

Lena began to cry and moan afresh, begging the minister to take her
home. He looked helplessly at Canute. Canute said simply,

“If you are warm now, you can marry us.”

“My daughter, do you take this step of your own free will ?” asked the
minister in a trembling voice.

“No, sir, I don't, and it is disgraceful he should force me into it! I
won't marry him.”

“Then, Canute, I cannot marry you,” said the minister, standing as
straight as his rheumatic limbs would let him.

“Are you ready to marry us now, sir ?” said Canute, laying one iron hand
on his stooped shoulder. The little preacher was a good man, but like
most men of weak body he was a coward and had a horror of physical
suffering, although he had known so much of it. So with many qualms of
conscience he began to repeat the marriage service. Lena sat sullenly in
her chair, staring at the fire. Canute stood beside her, listening with
his head bent reverently and his hands folded on his breast. When the
little man had prayed and said amen, Canute began bundling him up again.

“I will take you home, now,” he said as he carried him out and placed
him in his buggy, and started off with him through the fury of the
storm, floundering among the snow drifts that brought even the giant
himself to his knees.

After she was left alone, Lena soon ceased weeping. She was not of a
particularly sensitive temperament, and had little pride beyond that of
vanity. After the first bitter anger wore itself out, she felt nothing
more than a healthy sense of humiliation and defeat. She had no
inclination to run away, for she was married now, and in her eyes
that was final and all rebellion was useless. She knew nothing about
a license, but she knew that a preacher married folks. She consoled
herself by thinking that she had always intended to marry Canute
someday, anyway.

She grew tired of crying and looking into the fire, so she got up and
began to look about her. She had heard queer tales about the inside of
Canute's shanty, and her curiosity soon got the better of her rage.
One of the first things she noticed was the new black suit of clothes
hanging on the wall. She was dull, but it did not take a vain woman long
to interpret anything so decidedly flattering, and she was pleased in
spite of herself. As she looked through the cupboard, the general air of
neglect and discomfort made her pity the man who lived there.

“Poor fellow, no wonder he wants to get married to get somebody to wash
up his dishes. Batchin's pretty hard on a man.”

It is easy to pity when once one's vanity has been tickled. She looked
at the windowsill and gave a little shudder and wondered if the man were
crazy. Then she sat down again and sat a long time wondering what her
Dick and Ole would do.

“It is queer Dick didn't come right over after me. He surely came, for
he would have left town before the storm began and he might just as
well come right on as go back. If he'd hurried he would have gotten here
before the preacher came. I suppose he was afraid to come, for he
knew Canuteson could pound him to jelly, the coward!” Her eyes flashed
angrily.

The weary hours wore on and Lena began to grow horribly lonesome. It was
an uncanny night and this was an uncanny place to be in. She could
hear the coyotes howling hungrily a little way from the cabin, and more
terrible still were all the unknown noises of the storm. She remembered
the tales they told of the big log overhead and she was afraid of those
snaky things on the windowsills. She remembered the man who had been
killed in the draw, and she wondered what she would do if she saw crazy
Lou's white face glaring into the window. The rattling of the door
became unbearable, she thought the latch must be loose and took the
lamp to look at it. Then for the first time she saw the ugly brown snake
skins whose death rattle sounded every time the wind jarred the door.

“Canute, Canute!” she screamed in terror.

Outside the door she heard a heavy sound as of a big dog getting up and
shaking himself. The door opened and Canute stood before her, white as a
snow drift.

“What is it ?” he asked kindly.

“I am cold,” she faltered.

He went out and got an armful of wood and a basket of cobs and filled
the stove. Then he went out and lay in the snow before the door.
Presently he heard her calling again.

“What is it ?” he said, sitting up.

“I'm so lonesome, I'm afraid to stay in here all alone.”

“I will go over and get your mother.” And he got up.

“She won't come.”

“I'll bring her,” said Canute grimly.

“No, no. I don't want her, she will scold all the time.”

“Well, I will bring your father.”

She spoke again and it seemed as though her mouth was close up to the
key-hole. She spoke lower than he had ever heard her speak before, so
low that he had to put his ear up to the lock to hear her.

“I don't want him either, Canute,--I'd rather have you.”

For a moment she heard no noise at all, then something like a groan.
With a cry of fear she opened the door, and saw Canute stretched in the
snow at her feet, his face in his hands, sobbing on the doorstep.





Eric Hermannson's Soul


It was a great night at the Lone Star schoolhouse--a night when the
Spirit was present with power and when God was very near to man. So
it seemed to Asa Skinner, servant of God and Free Gospeller. The
schoolhouse was crowded with the saved and sanctified, robust men
and women, trembling and quailing before the power of some mysterious
psychic force. Here and there among this cowering, sweating multitude
crouched some poor wretch who had felt the pangs of an awakened
conscience, but had not yet experienced that complete divestment of
reason, that frenzy born of a convulsion of the mind, which, in the
parlance of the Free Gospellers, is termed “the Light.” On the floor
before the mourners' bench lay the unconscious figure of a man in whom
outraged nature had sought her last resort. This “trance” state is the
highest evidence of grace among the Free Gospellers, and indicates a
close walking with God.

Before the desk stood Asa Skinner, shouting of the mercy and vengeance
of God, and in his eyes shone a terrible earnestness, an almost
prophetic flame. Asa was a converted train gambler who used to run
between Omaha and Denver. He was a man made for the extremes of life;
from the most debauched of men he had become the most ascetic. His was a
bestial face, a face that bore the stamp of Nature's eternal injustice.
The forehead was low, projecting over the eyes, and the sandy hair was
plastered down over it and then brushed back at an abrupt right angle.
The chin was heavy, the nostrils were low and wide, and the lower lip
hung loosely except in his moments of spasmodic earnestness, when it
shut like a steel trap. Yet about those coarse features there were
deep, rugged furrows, the scars of many a hand-to-hand struggle with the
weakness of the flesh, and about that drooping lip were sharp, strenuous
lines that had conquered it and taught it to pray. Over those seamed
cheeks there was a certain pallor, a greyness caught from many a vigil.
It was as though, after Nature had done her worst with that face, some
fine chisel had gone over it, chastening and almost transfiguring it.
Tonight, as his muscles twitched with emotion, and the perspiration
dropped from his hair and chin, there was a certain convincing power
in the man. For Asa Skinner was a man possessed of a belief, of that
sentiment of the sublime before which all inequalities are leveled, that
transport of conviction which seems superior to all laws of condition,
under which debauchees have become martyrs; which made a tinker an
artist and a camel-driver the founder of an empire. This was with Asa
Skinner tonight, as he stood proclaiming the vengeance of God.

It might have occurred to an impartial observer that Asa Skinner's God
was indeed a vengeful God if he could reserve vengeance for those of
his creatures who were packed into the Lone Star schoolhouse that night.
Poor exiles of all nations; men from the south and the north, peasants
from almost every country of Europe, most of them from the mountainous,
night-bound coast of Norway. Honest men for the most part, but men with
whom the world had dealt hardly; the failures of all countries, men
sobered by toil and saddened by exile, who had been driven to fight for
the dominion of an untoward soil, to sow where others should gather, the
advance guard of a mighty civilization to be.

Never had Asa Skinner spoken more earnestly than now. He felt that
the Lord had this night a special work for him to do. Tonight Eric
Hermannson, the wildest lad on all the Divide, sat in his audience with
a fiddle on his knee, just as he had dropped in on his way to play for
some dance. The violin is an object of particular abhorrence to the Free
Gospellers. Their antagonism to the church organ is bitter enough, but
the fiddle they regard as a very incarnation of evil desires, singing
forever of worldly pleasures and inseparably associated with all
forbidden things.

Eric Hermannson had long been the object of the prayers of the
revivalists. His mother had felt the power of the Spirit weeks ago, and
special prayer-meetings had been held at her house for her son. But
Eric had only gone his ways laughing, the ways of youth, which are short
enough at best, and none too flowery on the Divide.

He slipped away from the prayer-meetings to meet the Campbell boys in
Genereau's saloon, or hug the plump little French girls at Chevalier's
dances, and sometimes, of a summer night, he even went across the dewy
cornfields and through the wild-plum thicket to play the fiddle for Lena
Hanson, whose name was a reproach through all the Divide country, where
the women are usually too plain and too busy and too tired to depart
from the ways of virtue. On such occasions Lena, attired in a pink
wrapper and silk stockings and tiny pink slippers, would sing to him,
accompanying herself on a battered guitar. It gave him a delicious sense
of freedom and experience to be with a woman who, no matter how, had
lived in big cities and knew the ways of town folk, who had never worked
in the fields and had kept her hands white and soft, her throat fair
and tender, who had heard great singers in Denver and Salt Lake, and who
knew the strange language of flattery and idleness and mirth.

Yet, careless as he seemed, the frantic prayers of his mother were not
altogether without their effect upon Eric. For days he had been fleeing
before them as a criminal from his pursuers, and over his pleasures had
fallen the shadow of something dark and terrible that dogged his steps.
The harder he danced, the louder he sang, the more was he conscious that
this phantom was gaining upon him, that in time it would track him down.
One Sunday afternoon, late in the fall, when he had been drinking beer
with Lena Hanson and listening to a song which made his cheeks burn, a
rattlesnake had crawled out of the side of the sod house and thrust its
ugly head in under the screen door. He was not afraid of snakes, but he
knew enough of Gospellism to feel the significance of the reptile lying
coiled there upon her doorstep. His lips were cold when he kissed Lena
goodbye, and he went there no more.

The final barrier between Eric and his mother's faith was his violin,
and to that he clung as a man sometimes will cling to his dearest sin,
to the weakness more precious to him than all his strength, In the great
world beauty comes to men in many guises, and art in a hundred forms,
but for Eric there was only his violin.

It stood, to him, for all the manifestations of art; it was his only
bridge into the kingdom of the soul.

It was to Eric Hermannson that the evangelist directed his impassioned
pleading that night.

“_Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me ?_ Is there a Saul here tonight
who has stopped his ears to that gentle pleading, who has thrust a spear
into that bleeding side ? Think of it, my brother; you are offered this
wonderful love and you prefer the worm that dieth not and the fire which
will not be quenched. What right have you to lose one of God's precious
souls ? _Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me ?_”

A great joy dawned in Asa Skinner's pale face, for he saw that Eric
Hermannson was swaying to and fro in his seat. The minister fell upon
his knees and threw his long arms up over his head.

“O my brothers! I feel it coming, the blessing we have prayed for. I
tell you the Spirit is coming! just a little more prayer, brothers, a
little more zeal, and he will be here. I can feel his cooling wing upon
my brow. Glory be to God forever and ever, amen!”

The whole congregation groaned under the pressure of this spiritual
panic. Shouts and hallelujahs went up from every lip. Another figure
fell prostrate upon the floor. From the mourners' bench rose a chant of
terror and rapture:


            “Eating honey and drinking wine,
            _Glory to the bleeding Lamb!_
            I am my Lord's and he is mine,
            _Glory to the bleeding Lamb!”_


The hymn was sung in a dozen dialects and voiced all the vague yearning
of these hungry lives, of these people who had starved all the passions
so long, only to fall victims to the barest of them all, fear.

A groan of ultimate anguish rose from Eric Hermannson's bowed head,
and the sound was like the groan of a great tree when it falls in the
forest.

The minister rose suddenly to his feet and threw back his head, crying
in a loud voice:

“_Lazarus, come forth!_ Eric Hermannson, you are lost, going down at
sea. In the name of God, and Jesus Christ his Son, I throw you the life
line. Take hold! Almighty God, my soul for his!” The minister threw his
arms out and lifted his quivering face.

Eric Hermannson rose to his feet; his lips were set and the lightning
was in his eyes. He took his violin by the neck and crushed it to
splinters across his knee, and to Asa Skinner the sound was like the
shackles of sin broken audibly asunder.



                              II

For more than two years Eric Hermannson kept the austere faith to which
he had sworn himself, kept it until a girl from the East came to spend
a week on the Nebraska Divide. She was a girl of other manners and
conditions, and there were greater distances between her life and Eric's
than all the miles which separated Rattlesnake Creek from New York City.
Indeed, she had no business to be in the West at all; but ah! across
what leagues of land and sea, by what improbable chances, do the
unrelenting gods bring to us our fate!

It was in a year of financial depression that Wyllis Elliot came to
Nebraska to buy cheap land and revisit the country where he had spent
a year of his youth. When he had graduated from Harvard it was still
customary for moneyed gentlemen to send their scapegrace sons to rough
it on ranches in the wilds of Nebraska or Dakota, or to consign them to
a living death in the sagebrush of the Black Hills. These young men did
not always return to the ways of civilized life. But Wyllis Elliot had
not married a half-breed, nor been shot in a cowpunchers' brawl, nor
wrecked by bad whisky, nor appropriated by a smirched adventuress. He
had been saved from these things by a girl, his sister, who had been
very near to his life ever since the days when they read fairy tales
together and dreamed the dreams that never come true. On this, his
first visit to his father's ranch since he left it six years before, he
brought her with him. She had been laid up half the winter from a sprain
received while skating, and had had too much time for reflection during
those months. She was restless and filled with a desire to see something
of the wild country of which her brother had told her so much. She was
to be married the next winter, and Wyllis understood her when she
begged him to take her with him on this long, aimless jaunt across the
continent, to taste the last of their freedom together. It comes to all
women of her type--that desire to taste the unknown which allures and
terrifies, to run one's whole soul's length out to the wind--just once.

It had been an eventful journey. Wyllis somehow understood that strain
of gypsy blood in his sister, and he knew where to take her. They had
slept in sod houses on the Platte River, made the acquaintance of the
personnel of a third-rate opera company on the train to Deadwood, dined
in a camp of railroad constructors at the world's end beyond New Castle,
gone through the Black Hills on horseback, fished for trout in Dome
Lake, watched a dance at Cripple Creek, where the lost souls who hide
in the hills gathered for their besotted revelry. And now, last of all,
before the return to thraldom, there was this little shack, anchored on
the windy crest of the Divide, a little black dot against the flaming
sunsets, a scented sea of cornland bathed in opalescent air and blinding
sunlight.

Margaret Elliot was one of those women of whom there are so many in this
day, when old order, passing, giveth place to new; beautiful, talented,
critical, unsatisfied, tired of the world at twenty-four. For the moment
the life and people of the Divide interested her. She was there but a
week; perhaps had she stayed longer, that inexorable ennui which travels
faster even than the Vestibule Limited would have overtaken her. The
week she tarried there was the week that Eric Hermannson was helping
Jerry Lockhart thresh; a week earlier or a week later, and there would
have been no story to write.

It was on Thursday and they were to leave on Saturday. Wyllis and his
sister were sitting on the wide piazza of the ranchhouse, staring out
into the afternoon sunlight and protesting against the gusts of hot wind
that blew up from the sandy riverbottom twenty miles to the southward.

The young man pulled his cap lower over his eyes and remarked:

“This wind is the real thing; you don't strike it anywhere else. You
remember we had a touch of it in Algiers and I told you it came from
Kansas. It's the keynote of this country.”

Wyllis touched her hand that lay on the hammock and continued gently:

“I hope it's paid you, Sis. Roughing it's dangerous business; it takes
the taste out of things.”

She shut her fingers firmly over the brown hand that was so like her
own.

“Paid ? Why, Wyllis, I haven't been so happy since we were children and
were going to discover the ruins of Troy together some day. Do you know,
I believe I could just stay on here forever and let the world go on its
own gait. It seems as though the tension and strain we used to talk of
last winter were gone for good, as though one could never give one's
strength out to such petty things any more.”

Wyllis brushed the ashes of his pipe away from the silk handkerchief
that was knotted about his neck and stared moodily off at the skyline.

“No, you're mistaken. This would bore you after a while. You can't shake
the fever of the other life. I've tried it. There was a time when the
gay fellows of Rome could trot down into the Thebaid and burrow into the
sandhills and get rid of it. But it's all too complex now. You see
we've made our dissipations so dainty and respectable that they've
gone further in than the flesh, and taken hold of the ego proper. You
couldn't rest, even here. The war cry would follow you.”

“You don't waste words, Wyllis, but you never miss fire. I talk more
than you do, without saying half so much. You must have learned the art
of silence from these taciturn Norwegians. I think I like silent men.”

“Naturally,” said Wyllis, “since you have decided to marry the most
brilliant talker you know.”

Both were silent for a time, listening to the sighing of the hot wind
through the parched morning-glory vines. Margaret spoke first.

“Tell me, Wyllis, were many of the Norwegians you used to know as
interesting as Eric Hermannson ?”

“Who, Siegfried ? Well, no. He used to be the flower of the Norwegian
youth in my day, and he's rather an exception, even now. He has
retrograded, though. The bonds of the soil have tightened on him, I
fancy.”

“Siegfried ? Come, that's rather good, Wyllis. He looks like a
dragon-slayer. What is it that makes him so different from the others ? I
can talk to him; he seems quite like a human being.”

 “Well,” said Wyllis, meditatively, “I don't read Bourget
as much as my cultured sister, and I'm not so well up in analysis, but
I fancy it's because one keeps cherishing a perfectly unwarranted
suspicion that under that big, hulking anatomy of his, he may conceal a
soul somewhere. _Nicht wahr ?_”

“Something like that,” said Margaret, thoughtfully, “except that it's
more than a suspicion, and it isn't groundless. He has one, and he makes
it known, somehow, without speaking.”

“I always have my doubts about loquacious souls,” Wyllis remarked, with
the unbelieving smile that had grown habitual with him.

Margaret went on, not heeding the interruption. “I knew it from the
first, when he told me about the suicide of his cousin, the Bernstein
boy. That kind of blunt pathos can't be summoned at will in anybody. The
earlier novelists rose to it, sometimes, unconsciously. But last night
when I sang for him I was doubly sure. Oh, I haven't told you about that
yet! Better light your pipe again. You see, he stumbled in on me in the
dark when I was pumping away at that old parlour organ to please Mrs.
Lockhart It's her household fetish and I've forgotten how many pounds of
butter she made and sold to buy it. Well, Eric stumbled in, and in some
inarticulate manner made me understand that he wanted me to sing for
him. I sang just the old things, of course. It's queer to sing familiar
things here at the world's end. It makes one think how the hearts of men
have carried them around the world, into the wastes of Iceland and the
jungles of Africa and the islands of the Pacific. I think if one lived
here long enough one would quite forget how to be trivial, and would
read only the great books that we never get time to read in the world,
and would remember only the great music, and the things that are really
worth while would stand out clearly against that horizon over there. And
of course I played the intermezzo from _Cavalleria Rusticana_ for him;
it goes rather better on an organ than most things do. He shuffled his
feet and twisted his big hands up into knots and blurted out that he
didn't know there was any music like that in the world. Why, there were
tears in his voice, Wyllis! Yes, like Rossetti, I _heard_ his tears.
Then it dawned upon me that it was probably the first good music he had
ever heard in all his life. Think of it, to care for music as he does
and never to hear it, never to know that it exists on earth! To long
for it as we long for other perfect experiences that never come. I
can't tell you what music means to that man. I never saw any one so
susceptible to it. It gave him speech, he became alive. When I had
finished the intermezzo, he began telling me about a little crippled
brother who died and whom he loved and used to carry everywhere in his
arms. He did not wait for encouragement. He took up the story and told
it slowly, as if to himself, just sort of rose up and told his own woe
to answer Mascagni's. It overcame me.”

“Poor devil,” said Wyllis, looking at her with mysterious eyes, “and so
you've given him a new woe. Now he'll go on wanting Grieg and
Schubert the rest of his days and never getting them. That's a girl's
philanthropy for you!”

Jerry Lockhart came out of the house screwing his chin over the unusual
luxury of a stiff white collar, which his wife insisted upon as a
necessary article of toilet while Miss Elliot was at the house. Jerry
sat down on the step and smiled his broad, red smile at Margaret.

“Well, I've got the music for your dance, Miss Elliot. Olaf Oleson
will bring his accordion and Mollie will play the organ, when she isn't
lookin' after the grub, and a little chap from Frenchtown will bring his
fiddle--though the French don't mix with the Norwegians much.”

“Delightful! Mr. Lockhart, that dance will be the feature of our trip,
and it's so nice of you to get it up for us. We'll see the Norwegians in
character at last,” cried Margaret, cordially.

“See here, Lockhart, I'll settle with you for backing her in this
scheme,” said Wyllis, sitting up and knocking the ashes out of his pipe.
“She's done crazy things enough on this trip, but to talk of dancing all
night with a gang of half-mad Norwegians and taking the carriage at four
to catch the six o'clock train out of Riverton--well, it's tommyrot,
that's what it is!”

“Wyllis, I leave it to your sovereign power of reason to decide whether
it isn't easier to stay up all night than to get up at three in the
morning. To get up at three, think what that means! No, sir, I prefer to
keep my vigil and then get into a sleeper.”

“But what do you want with the Norwegians ? I thought you were tired of
dancing.”

“So I am, with some people. But I want to see a Norwegian dance, and I
intend to. Come, Wyllis, you know how seldom it is that one really wants
to do anything nowadays. I wonder when I have really wanted to go to a
party before. It will be something to remember next month at Newport,
when we have to and don't want to. Remember your own theory that
contrast is about the only thing that makes life endurable. This is my
party and Mr. Lockhart's; your whole duty tomorrow night will consist in
being nice to the Norwegian girls. I'll warrant you were adept enough
at it once. And you'd better be very nice indeed, for if there are many
such young Valkyries as Eric's sister among them, they would simply tie
you up in a knot if they suspected you were guying them.”

Wyllis groaned and sank back into the hammock to consider his fate,
while his sister went on.

“And the guests, Mr. Lockhart, did they accept ?”

Lockhart took out his knife and began sharpening it on the sole of his
plowshoe.

“Well, I guess we'll have a couple dozen. You see it's pretty hard to
get a crowd together here any more. Most of 'em have gone over to the
Free Gospellers, and they'd rather put their feet in the fire than shake
'em to a fiddle.”

Margaret made a gesture of impatience. “Those Free Gospellers have just
cast an evil spell over this country, haven't they ?”

“Well,” said Lockhart, cautiously, “I don't just like to pass judgment
on any Christian sect, but if you're to know the chosen by their works,
the Gospellers can't make a very proud showin', an' that's a fact.
They're responsible for a few suicides, and they've sent a good-sized
delegation to the state insane asylum, an' I don't see as they've made
the rest of us much better than we were before. I had a little herdboy
last spring, as square a little Dane as I want to work for me, but after
the Gospellers got hold of him and sanctified him, the little beggar
used to get down on his knees out on the prairie and pray by the hour
and let the cattle get into the corn, an' I had to fire him. That's
about the way it goes. Now there's Eric; that chap used to be a hustler
and the spryest dancer in all this section-called all the dances. Now
he's got no ambition and he's glum as a preacher. I don't suppose we can
even get him to come in tomorrow night.”

“Eric ? Why, he must dance, we can't let him off,” said Margaret,
quickly. “Why, I intend to dance with him myself.”

“I'm afraid he won't dance. I asked him this morning if he'd help us out
and he said, 'I don't dance now, any more,'” said Lockhart, imitating
the laboured English of the Norwegian.

“'The Miller of Hofbau, the Miller of Hofbau, O my Princess!'” chirped
Wyllis, cheerfully, from his hammock.

The red on his sister's cheek deepened a little, and she laughed
mischievously. “We'll see about that, sir. I'll not admit that I am
beaten until I have asked him myself.”

Every night Eric rode over to St. Anne, a little village in the heart
of the French settlement, for the mail. As the road lay through the most
attractive part of the Divide country, on several occasions Margaret
Elliot and her brother had accompanied him. Tonight Wyllis had business
with Lockhart, and Margaret rode with Eric, mounted on a frisky little
mustang that Mrs. Lockhart had broken to the sidesaddle. Margaret
regarded her escort very much as she did the servant who always
accompanied her on long rides at home, and the ride to the village was
a silent one. She was occupied with thoughts of another world, and Eric
was wrestling with more thoughts than had ever been crowded into his
head before.

He rode with his eyes riveted on that slight figure before him, as
though he wished to absorb it through the optic nerves and hold it in
his brain forever. He understood the situation perfectly. His brain
worked slowly, but he had a keen sense of the values of things. This
girl represented an entirely new species of humanity to him, but he knew
where to place her. The prophets of old, when an angel first appeared
unto them, never doubted its high origin.

Eric was patient under the adverse conditions of his life, but he
was not servile. The Norse blood in him had not entirely lost its
self-reliance. He came of a proud fisher line, men who were not afraid
of anything but the ice and the devil, and he had prospects before him
when his father went down off the North Cape in the long Arctic night,
and his mother, seized by a violent horror of seafaring life, had
followed her brother to America. Eric was eighteen then, handsome as
young Siegfried, a giant in stature, with a skin singularly pure and
delicate, like a Swede's; hair as yellow as the locks of Tennyson's
amorous Prince, and eyes of a fierce, burning blue, whose flash was most
dangerous to women.

He had in those days a certain pride of bearing, a certain confidence of
approach, that usually accompanies physical perfection. It was even said
of him then that he was in love with life, and inclined to levity, a
vice most unusual on the Divide. But the sad history of those Norwegian
exiles, transplanted in an arid soil and under a scorching sun, had
repeated itself in his case. Toil and isolation had sobered him, and
he grew more and more like the clods among which he laboured. It was as
though some red-hot instrument had touched for a moment those delicate
fibers of the brain which respond to acute pain or pleasure, in which
lies the power of exquisite sensation, and had seared them quite away.
It is a painful thing to watch the light die out of the eyes of those
Norsemen, leaving an expression of impenetrable sadness, quite passive,
quite hopeless, a shadow that is never lifted. With some this change
comes almost at once, in the first bitterness of homesickness, with
others it comes more slowly, according to the time it takes each man's
heart to die.

Oh, those poor Northmen of the Divide! They are dead many a year before
they are put to rest in the little graveyard on the windy hill where
exiles of all nations grow akin.

The peculiar species of hypochondria to which the exiles of his people
sooner or later succumb had not developed in Eric until that night at
the Lone Star schoolhouse, when he had broken his violin across his
knee. After that, the gloom of his people settled down upon him, and the
gospel of maceration began its work.

_“If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out,”_ et cetera. The pagan smile
that once hovered about his lips was gone, and he was one with sorrow.
Religion heals a hundred hearts for one that it embitters, but when it
destroys, its work is quick and deadly, and where the agony of the cross
has been, joy will not come again. This man understood things literally:
one must live without pleasure to die without fear; to save the soul, it
was necessary to starve the soul.

The sun hung low above the cornfields when Margaret and her cavalier
left St. Anne. South of the town there is a stretch of road that runs
for some three miles through the French settlement, where the prairie
is as level as the surface of a lake. There the fields of flax and
wheat and rye are bordered by precise rows of slender, tapering Lombard
poplars. It was a yellow world that Margaret Elliot saw under the wide
light of the setting sun.

The girl gathered up her reins and called back to Eric, “It will be safe
to run the horses here, won't it ?”

“Yes, I think so, now,” he answered, touching his spur to his pony's
flank. They were off like the wind. It is an old saying in the West that
newcomers always ride a horse or two to death before they get broken
in to the country. They are tempted by the great open spaces and try to
outride the horizon, to get to the end of something. Margaret galloped
over the level road, and Eric, from behind, saw her long veil fluttering
in the wind. It had fluttered just so in his dreams last night and the
night before. With a sudden inspiration of courage he overtook her and
rode beside her, looking intently at her half-averted face. Before, he
had only stolen occasional glances at it, seen it in blinding flashes,
always with more or less embarrassment, but now he determined to let
every line of it sink into his memory. Men of the world would have said
that it was an unusual face, nervous, finely cut, with clear, elegant
lines that betokened ancestry. Men of letters would have called it a
historic face, and would have conjectured at what old passions, long
asleep, what old sorrows forgotten time out of mind, doing battle
together in ages gone, had curved those delicate nostrils, left their
unconscious memory in those eyes. But Eric read no meaning in these
details. To him this beauty was something more than colour and line;
it was a flash of white light, in which one cannot distinguish colour
because all colours are there. To him it was a complete revelation, an
embodiment of those dreams of impossible loveliness that linger by a
young man's pillow on midsummer nights; yet, because it held something
more than the attraction of health and youth and shapeliness, it
troubled him, and in its presence he felt as the Goths before the white
marbles in the Roman Capitol, not knowing whether they were men or gods.
At times he felt like uncovering his head before it, again the fury
seized him to break and despoil, to find the clay in this spirit-thing
and stamp upon it. Away from her, he longed to strike out with his arms,
and take and hold; it maddened him that this woman whom he could break
in his hands should be so much stronger than he. But near her, he never
questioned this strength; he admitted its potentiality as he admitted
the miracles of the Bible; it enervated and conquered him.

Tonight, when he rode so close to her that he could have touched her, he
knew that he might as well reach out his hand to take a star.

Margaret stirred uneasily under his gaze and turned questioningly in her
saddle.

“This wind puts me a little out of breath when we ride fast,” she said.

Eric turned his eyes away.

“I want to ask you if I go to New York to work, if I maybe hear music
like you sang last night ? I been a purty good hand to work,” he asked,
timidly.

Margaret looked at him with surprise, and then, as she studied the
outline of his face, pityingly.

“Well, you might--but you'd lose a good deal else. I shouldn't like you
to go to New York--and be poor, you'd be out of atmosphere, some
way,” she said, slowly. Inwardly she was thinking: _There he would be
altogether sordid, impossible--a machine who would carry one's trunks
upstairs, perhaps. Here he is every inch a man, rather picturesque; why
is it ?_ “No,” she added aloud, “I shouldn't like that.”

“Then I not go,” said Eric, decidedly.

Margaret turned her face to hide a smile. She was a trifle amused and a
trifle annoyed. Suddenly she spoke again.

“But I'll tell you what I do want you to do, Eric. I want you to dance
with us tomorrow night and teach me some of the Norwegian dances; they
say you know them all. Won't you ?”

Eric straightened himself in his saddle and his eyes flashed as they had
done in the Lone Star schoolhouse when he broke his violin across his
knee.

“Yes, I will,” he said, quietly, and he believed that he delivered his
soul to hell as he said it.

They had reached the rougher country now, where the road wound through
a narrow cut in one of the bluffs along the creek, when a beat of hoofs
ahead and the sharp neighing of horses made the ponies start and Eric
rose in his stirrups. Then down the gulch in front of them and over the
steep clay banks thundered a herd of wild ponies, nimble as monkeys and
wild as rabbits, such as horse-traders drive east from the plains of
Montana to sell in the farming country. Margaret's pony made a shrill
sound, a neigh that was almost a scream, and started up the clay bank to
meet them, all the wild blood of the range breaking out in an instant.
Margaret called to Eric just as he threw himself out of the saddle and
caught her pony's bit. But the wiry little animal had gone mad and was
kicking and biting like a devil. Her wild brothers of the range were all
about her, neighing, and pawing the earth, and striking her with their
forefeet and snapping at her flanks. It was the old liberty of the range
that the little beast fought for.

“Drop the reins and hold tight, tight!” Eric called, throwing all his
weight upon the bit, struggling under those frantic forefeet that now
beat at his breast, and now kicked at the wild mustangs that surged and
tossed about him. He succeeded in wrenching the pony's head toward him
and crowding her withers against the clay bank, so that she could not
roll.

“Hold tight, tight!” he shouted again, launching a kick at a snorting
animal that reared back against Margaret's saddle. If she should lose
her courage and fall now, under those hoofs--He struck out again and
again, kicking right and left with all his might. Already the negligent
drivers had galloped into the cut, and their long quirts were whistling
over the heads of the herd. As suddenly as it had come, the struggling,
frantic wave of wild life swept up out of the gulch and on across the
open prairie, and with a long despairing whinny of farewell the pony
dropped her head and stood trembling in her sweat, shaking the foam and
blood from her bit.

Eric stepped close to Margaret's side and laid his hand on her saddle.
“You are not hurt ?” he asked, hoarsely. As he raised his face in the
soft starlight she saw that it was white and drawn and that his lips
were working nervously.

“No, no, not at all. But you, you are suffering; they struck you!” she
cried in sharp alarm.

He stepped back and drew his hand across his brow.

“No, it is not that,” he spoke rapidly now, with his hands clenched at
his side. “But if they had hurt you, I would beat their brains out with
my hands. I would kill them all. I was never afraid before. You are the
only beautiful thing that has ever come close to me. You came like an
angel out of the sky. You are like the music you sing, you are like the
stars and the snow on the mountains where I played when I was a little
boy. You are like all that I wanted once and never had, you are all
that they have killed in me. I die for you tonight, tomorrow, for all
eternity. I am not a coward; I was afraid because I love you more than
Christ who died for me, more than I am afraid of hell, or hope for
heaven. I was never afraid before. If you had fallen--oh, my God!” He
threw his arms out blindly and dropped his head upon the pony's mane,
leaning limply against the animal like a man struck by some sickness.
His shoulders rose and fell perceptibly with his laboured breathing. The
horse stood cowed with exhaustion and fear. Presently Margaret laid her
hand on Eric's head and said gently:

“You are better now, shall we go on ? Can you get your horse ?”

“No, he has gone with the herd. I will lead yours, she is not safe.
I will not frighten you again.” His voice was still husky, but it was
steady now. He took hold of the bit and tramped home in silence.

When they reached the house, Eric stood stolidly by the pony's head
until Wyllis came to lift his sister from the saddle.

“The horses were badly frightened, Wyllis. I think I was pretty
thoroughly scared myself,” she said as she took her brother's arm and
went slowly up the hill toward the house. “No, I'm not hurt, thanks to
Eric. You must thank him for taking such good care of me. He's a mighty
fine fellow. I'll tell you all about it in the morning, dear. I was
pretty well shaken up and I'm going right to bed now. Good night.”

When she reached the low room in which she slept, she sank upon the bed
in her riding dress, face downward.

“Oh, I pity him! I pity him!” she murmured, with a long sigh of
exhaustion. She must have slept a little. When she rose again, she took
from her dress a letter that had been waiting for her at the village
post-office. It was closely written in a long, angular hand, covering a
dozen pages of foreign note-paper, and began:

My Dearest Margaret: if I should attempt to say _how like a winter hath
thine absence been_, I should incur the risk of being tedious. Really,
it takes the sparkle out of everything. Having nothing better to do, and
not caring to go anywhere in particular without you, I remained in the
city until Jack Courtwell noted my general despondency and brought me
down here to his place on the sound to manage some open-air theatricals
he is getting up. _As You Like It_ is of course the piece selected. Miss
Harrison plays Rosalind. I wish you had been here to take the part. Miss
Harrison reads her lines well, but she is either a maiden-all-forlorn or
a tomboy; insists on reading into the part all sorts of deeper meanings
and highly coloured suggestions wholly out of harmony with the pastoral
setting. Like most of the professionals, she exaggerates the emotional
element and quite fails to do justice to Rosalind's facile wit and
really brilliant mental qualities. Gerard will do Orlando, but rumor
says he is _epris_ of your sometime friend, Miss Meredith, and his
memory is treacherous and his interest fitful.

My new pictures arrived last week on the _Gascogne_. The Puvis de
Chavannes is even more beautiful than I thought it in Paris. A pale
dream-maiden sits by a pale dream-cow and a stream of anemic water flows
at her feet. The Constant, you will remember, I got because you admired
it. It is here in all its florid splendour, the whole dominated by a
glowing sensuosity. The drapery of the female figure is as wonderful as
you said; the fabric all barbaric pearl and gold, painted with an easy,
effortless voluptuousness, and that white, gleaming line of African
coast in the background recalls memories of you very precious to me. But
it is useless to deny that Constant irritates me. Though I cannot prove
the charge against him, his brilliancy always makes me suspect him of
cheapness.

Here Margaret stopped and glanced at the remaining pages of this strange
love-letter. They seemed to be filled chiefly with discussions of
pictures and books, and with a slow smile she laid them by.

She rose and began undressing. Before she lay down she went to open the
window. With her hand on the sill, she hesitated, feeling suddenly as
though some danger were lurking outside, some inordinate desire waiting
to spring upon her in the darkness. She stood there for a long time,
gazing at the infinite sweep of the sky.

“Oh, it is all so little, so little there,” she murmured. “When
everything else is so dwarfed, why should one expect love to be great ?
Why should one try to read highly coloured suggestions into a life like
that ? If only I could find one thing in it all that mattered greatly,
one thing that would warm me when I am alone! Will life never give me
that one great moment ?”

As she raised the window, she heard a sound in the plum bushes outside.
It was only the house-dog roused from his sleep, but Margaret started
violently and trembled so that she caught the foot of the bed for
support. Again she felt herself pursued by some overwhelming longing,
some desperate necessity for herself, like the outstretching of
helpless, unseen arms in the darkness, and the air seemed heavy with
sighs of yearning. She fled to her bed with the words, “I love you more
than Christ who died for me!” ringing in her ears.


                             III

About midnight the dance at Lockhart's was at its height. Even the old
men who had come to “look on” caught the spirit of revelry and stamped
the floor with the vigor of old Silenus. Eric took the violin from the
Frenchmen, and Minna Oleson sat at the organ, and the music grew more
and more characteristic--rude, half mournful music, made up of the
folksongs of the North, that the villagers sing through the long night
in hamlets by the sea, when they are thinking of the sun, and the
spring, and the fishermen so long away. To Margaret some of it sounded
like Grieg's _Peer Gynt_ music. She found something irresistibly
infectious in the mirth of these people who were so seldom merry, and
she felt almost one of them. Something seemed struggling for freedom
in them tonight, something of the joyous childhood of the nations
which exile had not killed. The girls were all boisterous with delight.
Pleasure came to them but rarely, and when it came, they caught at it
wildly and crushed its fluttering wings in their strong brown fingers.
They had a hard life enough, most of them. Torrid summers and freezing
winters, labour and drudgery and ignorance, were the portion of
their girlhood; a short wooing, a hasty, loveless marriage, unlimited
maternity, thankless sons, premature age and ugliness, were the dower
of their womanhood. But what matter ? Tonight there was hot liquor in the
glass and hot blood in the heart; tonight they danced.

Tonight Eric Hermannson had renewed his youth. He was no longer the big,
silent Norwegian who had sat at Margaret's feet and looked hopelessly
into her eyes. Tonight he was a man, with a man's rights and a man's
power. Tonight he was Siegfried indeed. His hair was yellow as the heavy
wheat in the ripe of summer, and his eyes flashed like the blue water
between the ice packs in the north seas. He was not afraid of Margaret
tonight, and when he danced with her he held her firmly. She was tired
and dragged on his arm a little, but the strength of the man was like
an all-pervading fluid, stealing through her veins, awakening under her
heart some nameless, unsuspected existence that had slumbered there all
these years and that went out through her throbbing fingertips to his
that answered. She wondered if the hoydenish blood of some lawless
ancestor, long asleep, were calling out in her tonight, some drop of
a hotter fluid that the centuries had failed to cool, and why, if this
curse were in her, it had not spoken before. But was it a curse, this
awakening, this wealth before undiscovered, this music set free ? For the
first time in her life her heart held something stronger than herself,
was not this worthwhile ? Then she ceased to wonder. She lost sight of
the lights and the faces and the music was drowned by the beating of her
own arteries. She saw only the blue eyes that flashed above her, felt
only the warmth of that throbbing hand which held hers and which the
blood of his heart fed. Dimly, as in a dream, she saw the drooping
shoulders, high white forehead and tight, cynical mouth of the man she
was to marry in December. For an hour she had been crowding back the
memory of that face with all her strength.

“Let us stop, this is enough,” she whispered. His only answer was to
tighten the arm behind her. She sighed and let that masterful strength
bear her where it would. She forgot that this man was little more than
a savage, that they would part at dawn. The blood has no memories, no
reflections, no regrets for the past, no consideration of the future.

“Let us go out where it is cooler,” she said when the music stopped;
thinking, _I am growing faint here, I shall be all right in the open
air_. They stepped out into the cool, blue air of the night.

Since the older folk had begun dancing, the young Norwegians had been
slipping out in couples to climb the windmill tower into the cooler
atmosphere, as is their custom.

“You like to go up ?” asked Eric, close to her ear.

She turned and looked at him with suppressed amusement. “How high is
it ?”

“Forty feet, about. I not let you fall.” There was a note of
irresistible pleading in his voice, and she felt that he tremendously
wished her to go. Well, why not ? This was a night of the unusual, when
she was not herself at all, but was living an unreality. Tomorrow, yes,
in a few hours, there would be the Vestibule Limited and the world.

“Well, if you'll take good care of me. I used to be able to climb, when
I was a little girl.”

Once at the top and seated on the platform, they were silent. Margaret
wondered if she would not hunger for that scene all her life, through
all the routine of the days to come. Above them stretched the great
Western sky, serenely blue, even in the night, with its big, burning
stars, never so cold and dead and far away as in denser atmospheres. The
moon would not be up for twenty minutes yet, and all about the horizon,
that wide horizon, which seemed to reach around the world, lingered a
pale white light, as of a universal dawn. The weary wind brought up to
them the heavy odours of the cornfields. The music of the dance sounded
faintly from below. Eric leaned on his elbow beside her, his legs
swinging down on the ladder. His great shoulders looked more than ever
like those of the stone Doryphorus, who stands in his perfect, reposeful
strength in the Louvre, and had often made her wonder if such men died
forever with the youth of Greece.

“How sweet the corn smells at night,” said Margaret nervously.

“Yes, like the flowers that grow in paradise, I think.”

She was somewhat startled by this reply, and more startled when this
taciturn man spoke again.

“You go away tomorrow ?”

“Yes, we have stayed longer than we thought to now.”

“You not come back any more ?”

“No, I expect not. You see, it is a long trip halfway across the
continent.”

“You soon forget about this country, I guess.” It seemed to him now
a little thing to lose his soul for this woman, but that she should
utterly forget this night into which he threw all his life and all his
eternity, that was a bitter thought.

“No, Eric, I will not forget. You have all been too kind to me for that.
And you won't be sorry you danced this one night, will you ?”

“I never be sorry. I have not been so happy before. I not be so happy
again, ever. You will be happy many nights yet, I only this one. I will
dream sometimes, maybe.”

The mighty resignation of his tone alarmed and touched her. It was as
when some great animal composes itself for death, as when a great ship
goes down at sea.

She sighed, but did not answer him. He drew a little closer and looked
into her eyes.

“You are not always happy, too ?” he asked.

“No, not always, Eric; not very often, I think.”

“You have a trouble ?”

“Yes, but I cannot put it into words. Perhaps if I could do that, I
could cure it.”

He clasped his hands together over his heart, as children do when they
pray, and said falteringly, “If I own all the world, I give him you.”

Margaret felt a sudden moisture in her eyes, and laid her hand on his.

“Thank you, Eric; I believe you would. But perhaps even then I should
not be happy. Perhaps I have too much of it already.”

She did not take her hand away from him; she did not dare. She sat still
and waited for the traditions in which she had always believed to speak
and save her. But they were dumb. She belonged to an ultra-refined
civilization which tries to cheat nature with elegant sophistries. Cheat
nature ? Bah! One generation may do it, perhaps two, but the third--Can
we ever rise above nature or sink below her ? Did she not turn on
Jerusalem as upon Sodom, upon St. Anthony in his desert as upon Nero
in his seraglio ? Does she not always cry in brutal triumph: “I am here
still, at the bottom of things, warming the roots of life; you cannot
starve me nor tame me nor thwart me; I made the world, I rule it, and I
am its destiny.”

This woman, on a windmill tower at the world's end with a giant
barbarian, heard that cry tonight, and she was afraid! Ah! the terror
and the delight of that moment when first we fear ourselves! Until then
we have not lived.

“Come, Eric, let us go down; the moon is up and the music has begun
again,” she said.

He rose silently and stepped down upon the ladder, putting his arm about
her to help her. That arm could have thrown Thor's hammer out in the
cornfields yonder, yet it scarcely touched her, and his hand trembled
as it had done in the dance. His face was level with hers now and the
moonlight fell sharply upon it. All her life she had searched the faces
of men for the look that lay in his eyes. She knew that that look had
never shone for her before, would never shine for her on earth again,
that such love comes to one only in dreams or in impossible places like
this, unattainable always. This was Love's self, in a moment it would
die. Stung by the agonized appeal that emanated from the man's whole
being, she leaned forward and laid her lips on his. Once, twice and
again she heard the deep respirations rattle in his throat while
she held them there, and the riotous force under her head became
an engulfing weakness. He drew her up to him until he felt all the
resistance go out of her body, until every nerve relaxed and yielded.
When she drew her face back from his, it was white with fear.

“Let us go down, oh, my God! let us go down!” she muttered. And the
drunken stars up yonder seemed reeling to some appointed doom as she
clung to the rounds of the ladder. All that she was to know of love she
had left upon his lips.

“The devil is loose again,” whispered Olaf Oleson, as he saw Eric
dancing a moment later, his eyes blazing.

But Eric was thinking with an almost savage exultation of the time when
he should pay for this. Ah, there would be no quailing then! if ever a
soul went fearlessly, proudly down to the gates infernal, his should go.
For a moment he fancied he was there already, treading down the tempest
of flame, hugging the fiery hurricane to his breast. He wondered whether
in ages gone, all the countless years of sinning in which men had sold
and lost and flung their souls away, any man had ever so cheated Satan,
had ever bartered his soul for so great a price.

It seemed but a little while till dawn.

The carriage was brought to the door and Wyllis Elliot and his sister
said goodbye. She could not meet Eric's eyes as she gave him her hand,
but as he stood by the horse's head, just as the carriage moved off, she
gave him one swift glance that said, “I will not forget.” In a moment
the carriage was gone.

Eric changed his coat and plunged his head into the water tank and went
to the barn to hook up his team. As he led his horses to the door, a
shadow fell across his path, and he saw Skinner rising in his stirrups.
His rugged face was pale and worn with looking after his wayward flock,
with dragging men into the way of salvation.

“Good morning, Eric. There was a dance here last night ?” he asked,
sternly.

“A dance ? Oh, yes, a dance,” replied Eric, cheerfully.

“Certainly you did not dance, Eric ?”

“Yes, I danced. I danced all the time.”

The minister's shoulders drooped, and an expression of profound
discouragement settled over his haggard face. There was almost anguish
in the yearning he felt for this soul.

“Eric, I didn't look for this from you. I thought God had set his mark
on you if he ever had on any man. And it is for things like this that
you set your soul back a thousand years from God. O foolish and perverse
generation!”

Eric drew himself up to his full height and looked off to where the new
day was gilding the corn-tassels and flooding the uplands with light.
As his nostrils drew in the breath of the dew and the morning, something
from the only poetry he had ever read flashed across his mind, and he
murmured, half to himself, with dreamy exultation:

“'And a day shall be as a thousand years, and a thousand years as a
day.'”




The Enchanted Bluff

We had our swim before sundown, and while we were cooking our supper the
oblique rays of light made a dazzling glare on the white sand about
us. The translucent red ball itself sank behind the brown stretches
of cornfield as we sat down to eat, and the warm layer of air that had
rested over the water and our clean sand bar grew fresher and smelled of
the rank ironweed and sunflowers growing on the flatter shore. The river
was brown and sluggish, like any other of the half-dozen streams that
water the Nebraska corn lands. On one shore was an irregular line of
bald clay bluffs where a few scrub oaks with thick trunks and flat,
twisted tops threw light shadows on the long grass. The western shore
was low and level, with cornfields that stretched to the skyline, and
all along the water's edge were little sandy coves and beaches where
slim cottonwoods and willow saplings flickered.

The turbulence of the river in springtime discouraged milling, and,
beyond keeping the old red bridge in repair, the busy farmers did not
concern themselves with the stream; so the Sandtown boys were left in
undisputed possession. In the autumn we hunted quail through the miles
of stubble and fodder land along the flat shore, and, after the winter
skating season was over and the ice had gone out, the spring freshets
and flooded bottoms gave us our great excitement of the year. The
channel was never the same for two successive seasons. Every spring the
swollen stream undermined a bluff to the east, or bit out a few acres of
cornfield to the west and whirled the soil away, to deposit it in spumy
mud banks somewhere else. When the water fell low in midsummer, new sand
bars were thus exposed to dry and whiten in the August sun. Sometimes
these were banked so firmly that the fury of the next freshet failed to
unseat them; the little willow seedlings emerged triumphantly from the
yellow froth, broke into spring leaf, shot up into summer growth, and
with their mesh of roots bound together the moist sand beneath them
against the batterings of another April. Here and there a cottonwood
soon glittered among them, quivering in the low current of air that,
even on breathless days when the dust hung like smoke above the wagon
road, trembled along the face of the water.

It was on such an island, in the third summer of its yellow green, that
we built our watch fire; not in the thicket of dancing willow wands, but
on the level terrace of fine sand which had been added that spring;
a little new bit of world, beautifully ridged with ripple marks, and
strewn with the tiny skeletons of turtles and fish, all as white and dry
as if they had been expertly cured. We had been careful not to mar the
freshness of the place, although we often swam to it on summer evenings
and lay on the sand to rest.

This was our last watch fire of the year, and there were reasons why I
should remember it better than any of the others. Next week the other
boys were to file back to their old places in the Sandtown High School,
but I was to go up to the Divide to teach my first country school in the
Norwegian district. I was already homesick at the thought of quitting
the boys with whom I had always played; of leaving the river, and going
up into a windy plain that was all windmills and cornfields and
big pastures; where there was nothing wilful or unmanageable in the
landscape, no new islands, and no chance of unfamiliar birds--such as
often followed the watercourses.

Other boys came and went and used the river for fishing or skating,
but we six were sworn to the spirit of the stream, and we were friends
mainly because of the river. There were the two Hassler boys, Fritz and
Otto, sons of the little German tailor. They were the youngest of us;
ragged boys of ten and twelve, with sunburned hair, weather-stained
faces, and pale blue eyes. Otto, the elder, was the best mathematician
in school, and clever at his books, but he always dropped out in the
spring term as if the river could not get on without him. He and Fritz
caught the fat, horned catfish and sold them about the town, and they
lived so much in the water that they were as brown and sandy as the
river itself.

There was Percy Pound, a fat, freckled boy with chubby cheeks, who took
half a dozen boys' story-papers and was always being kept in for reading
detective stories behind his desk. There was Tip Smith, destined by
his freckles and red hair to be the buffoon in all our games, though he
walked like a timid little old man and had a funny, cracked laugh. Tip
worked hard in his father's grocery store every afternoon, and swept it
out before school in the morning. Even his recreations were laborious.
He collected cigarette cards and tin tobacco-tags indefatigably, and
would sit for hours humped up over a snarling little scroll-saw which he
kept in his attic. His dearest possessions were some little pill bottles
that purported to contain grains of wheat from the Holy Land, water from
the Jordan and the Dead Sea, and earth from the Mount of Olives. His
father had bought these dull things from a Baptist missionary who
peddled them, and Tip seemed to derive great satisfaction from their
remote origin.

The tall boy was Arthur Adams. He had fine hazel eyes that were almost
too reflective and sympathetic for a boy, and such a pleasant voice that
we all loved to hear him read aloud. Even when he had to read poetry
aloud at school, no one ever thought of laughing. To be sure, he was
not at school very much of the time. He was seventeen and should
have finished the High School the year before, but he was always off
somewhere with his gun. Arthur's mother was dead, and his father, who
was feverishly absorbed in promoting schemes, wanted to send the boy
away to school and get him off his hands; but Arthur always begged off
for another year and promised to study. I remember him as a tall, brown
boy with an intelligent face, always lounging among a lot of us little
fellows, laughing at us oftener than with us, but such a soft, satisfied
laugh that we felt rather flattered when we provoked it. In after-years
people said that Arthur had been given to evil ways as a lad, and it is
true that we often saw him with the gambler's sons and with old Spanish
Fanny's boy, but if he learned anything ugly in their company he never
betrayed it to us. We would have followed Arthur anywhere, and I am
bound to say that he led us into no worse places than the cattail
marshes and the stubble fields. These, then, were the boys who camped
with me that summer night upon the sand bar.

After we finished our supper we beat the willow thicket for driftwood.
By the time we had collected enough, night had fallen, and the pungent,
weedy smell from the shore increased with the coolness. We threw
ourselves down about the fire and made another futile effort to show
Percy Pound the Little Dipper. We had tried it often before, but he
could never be got past the big one.

“You see those three big stars just below the handle, with the bright
one in the middle ?” said Otto Hassler; “that's Orion's belt, and the
bright one is the clasp.” I crawled behind Otto's shoulder and sighted
up his arm to the star that seemed perched upon the tip of his steady
forefinger. The Hassler boys did seine-fishing at night, and they knew a
good many stars.

Percy gave up the Little Dipper and lay back on the sand, his hands
clasped under his head. “I can see the North Star,” he announced,
contentedly, pointing toward it with his big toe. “Anyone might get lost
and need to know that.”

We all looked up at it.

“How do you suppose Columbus felt when his compass didn't point north
any more ?” Tip asked.

Otto shook his head. “My father says that there was another North Star
once, and that maybe this one won't last always. I wonder what would
happen to us down here if anything went wrong with it ?”

Arthur chuckled. “I wouldn't worry, Ott. Nothing's apt to happen to it
in your time. Look at the Milky Way! There must be lots of good dead
Indians.”

We lay back and looked, meditating, at the dark cover of the world. The
gurgle of the water had become heavier. We had often noticed a mutinous,
complaining note in it at night, quite different from its cheerful
daytime chuckle, and seeming like the voice of a much deeper and more
powerful stream. Our water had always these two moods: the one of sunny
complaisance, the other of inconsolable, passionate regret.

“Queer how the stars are all in sort of diagrams,” remarked Otto. “You
could do most any proposition in geometry with 'em. They always look
as if they meant something. Some folks say everybody's fortune is all
written out in the stars, don't they ?”

“They believe so in the old country,” Fritz affirmed.

But Arthur only laughed at him. “You're thinking of Napoleon, Fritzey.
He had a star that went out when he began to lose battles. I guess the
stars don't keep any close tally on Sandtown folks.”

We were speculating on how many times we could count a hundred before
the evening star went down behind the cornfields, when someone cried,
“There comes the moon, and it's as big as a cart wheel!”

We all jumped up to greet it as it swam over the bluffs behind us. It
came up like a galleon in full sail; an enormous, barbaric thing, red as
an angry heathen god.

“When the moon came up red like that, the Aztecs used to sacrifice their
prisoners on the temple top,” Percy announced.

“Go on, Perce. You got that out of _Golden Days_. Do you believe that,
Arthur ?” I appealed.

Arthur answered, quite seriously: “Like as not. The moon was one of
their gods. When my father was in Mexico City he saw the stone where
they used to sacrifice their prisoners.”

As we dropped down by the fire again some one asked whether the
Mound-Builders were older than the Aztecs. When we once got upon the
Mound-Builders we never willingly got away from them, and we were still
conjecturing when we heard a loud splash in the water.

“Must have been a big cat jumping,” said Fritz. “They do sometimes. They
must see bugs in the dark. Look what a track the moon makes!”

There was a long, silvery streak on the water, and where the current
fretted over a big log it boiled up like gold pieces.

“Suppose there ever _was_ any gold hid away in this old river ?” Fritz
asked. He lay like a little brown Indian, close to the fire, his chin on
his hand and his bare feet in the air. His brother laughed at him, but
Arthur took his suggestion seriously.

“Some of the Spaniards thought there was gold up here somewhere. Seven
cities chuck full of gold, they had it, and Coronado and his men came up
to hunt it. The Spaniards were all over this country once.”

Percy looked interested. “Was that before the Mormons went through ?”

We all laughed at this.

“Long enough before. Before the Pilgrim Fathers, Perce. Maybe they came
along this very river. They always followed the watercourses.”

“I wonder where this river really does begin ?” Tip mused. That was an
old and a favorite mystery which the map did not clearly explain. On the
map the little black line stopped somewhere in western Kansas; but since
rivers generally rose in mountains, it was only reasonable to suppose
that ours came from the Rockies. Its destination, we knew, was the
Missouri, and the Hassler boys always maintained that we could embark
at Sandtown in floodtime, follow our noses, and eventually arrive at
New Orleans. Now they took up their old argument. “If us boys had grit
enough to try it, it wouldn't take no time to get to Kansas City and St.
Joe.”

We began to talk about the places we wanted to go to. The Hassler boys
wanted to see the stockyards in Kansas City, and Percy wanted to see
a big store in Chicago. Arthur was interlocutor and did not betray
himself.

“Now it's your turn, Tip.”

Tip rolled over on his elbow and poked the fire, and his eyes looked
shyly out of his queer, tight little face. “My place is awful far away.
My Uncle Bill told me about it.”

Tip's Uncle Bill was a wanderer, bitten with mining fever, who had
drifted into Sandtown with a broken arm, and when it was well had
drifted out again.

“Where is it ?”

“Aw, it's down in New Mexico somewheres. There aren't no railroads or
anything. You have to go on mules, and you run out of water before you
get there and have to drink canned tomatoes.”

“Well, go on, kid. What's it like when you do get there ?”

Tip sat up and excitedly began his story.

“There's a big red rock there that goes right up out of the sand for
about nine hundred feet. The country's flat all around it, and this here
rock goes up all by itself, like a monument. They call it the Enchanted
Bluff down there, because no white man has ever been on top of it. The
sides are smooth rock, and straight up, like a wall. The Indians say
that hundreds of years ago, before the Spaniards came, there was a
village away up there in the air. The tribe that lived there had some
sort of steps, made out of wood and bark, bung down over the face of the
bluff, and the braves went down to hunt and carried water up in big jars
swung on their backs. They kept a big supply of water and dried meat up
there, and never went down except to hunt. They were a peaceful tribe
that made cloth and pottery, and they went up there to get out of the
wars. You see, they could pick off any war party that tried to get up
their little steps. The Indians say they were a handsome people, and
they had some sort of queer religion. Uncle Bill thinks they were
Cliff-Dwellers who had got into trouble and left home. They weren't
fighters, anyhow.

“One time the braves were down hunting and an awful storm came up--a
kind of waterspout--and when they got back to their rock they found
their little staircase had been all broken to pieces, and only a few
steps were left hanging away up in the air. While they were camped at
the foot of the rock, wondering what to do, a war party from the north
came along and massacred 'em to a man, with all the old folks and women
looking on from the rock. Then the war party went on south and left the
village to get down the best way they could. Of course they never got
down. They starved to death up there, and when the war party came back
on their way north, they could hear the children crying from the edge
of the bluff where they had crawled out, but they didn't see a sign of a
grown Indian, and nobody has ever been up there since.”

We exclaimed at this dolorous legend and sat up.

“There couldn't have been many people up there,” Percy demurred. “How
big is the top, Tip ?”

“Oh, pretty big. Big enough so that the rock doesn't look nearly as tall
as it is. The top's bigger than the base. The bluff is sort of worn away
for several hundred feet up. That's one reason it's so hard to climb.”

I asked how the Indians got up, in the first place.

“Nobody knows how they got up or when. A hunting party came along once
and saw that there was a town up there, and that was all.”

Otto rubbed his chin and looked thoughtful. “Of course there must be
some way to get up there. Couldn't people get a rope over someway and
pull a ladder up ?”

Tip's little eyes were shining with excitement. “I know a way. Me and
Uncle Bill talked it over. There's a kind of rocket that would take a
rope over--lifesavers use 'em--and then you could hoist a rope ladder
and peg it down at the bottom and make it tight with guy ropes on the
other side. I'm going to climb that there bluff, and I've got it all
planned out.”

Fritz asked what he expected to find when he got up there.

“Bones, maybe, or the ruins of their town, or pottery, or some of their
idols. There might be 'most anything up there. Anyhow, I want to see.”

“Sure nobody else has been up there, Tip ?” Arthur asked.

“Dead sure. Hardly anybody ever goes down there. Some hunters tried to
cut steps in the rock once, but they didn't get higher than a man can
reach. The Bluff's all red granite, and Uncle Bill thinks it's a boulder
the glaciers left. It's a queer place, anyhow. Nothing but cactus and
desert for hundreds of miles, and yet right under the Bluff there's good
water and plenty of grass. That's why the bison used to go down there.”

Suddenly we heard a scream above our fire, and jumped up to see a dark,
slim bird floating southward far above us--a whooping crane, we knew by
her cry and her long neck. We ran to the edge of the island, hoping we
might see her alight, but she wavered southward along the rivercourse
until we lost her. The Hassler boys declared that by the look of the
heavens it must be after midnight, so we threw more wood on our fire,
put on our jackets, and curled down in the warm sand. Several of us
pretended to doze, but I fancy we were really thinking about Tip's Bluff
and the extinct people. Over in the wood the ring doves were calling
mournfully to one another, and once we heard a dog bark, far away.
“Somebody getting into old Tommy's melon patch,” Fritz murmured
sleepily, but nobody answered him. By and by Percy spoke out of the
shadows.

“Say, Tip, when you go down there will you take me with you ?”

“Maybe.”

“Suppose one of us beats you down there, Tip ?”

“Whoever gets to the Bluff first has got to promise to tell the rest of
us exactly what he finds,” remarked one of the Hassler boys, and to this
we all readily assented.

Somewhat reassured, I dropped off to sleep. I must have dreamed about a
race for the Bluff, for I awoke in a kind of fear that other people were
getting ahead of me and that I was losing my chance. I sat up in my
damp clothes and looked at the other boys, who lay tumbled in uneasy
attitudes about the dead fire. It was still dark, but the sky was blue
with the last wonderful azure of night. The stars glistened like crystal
globes, and trembled as if they shone through a depth of clear water.
Even as I watched, they began to pale and the sky brightened. Day came
suddenly, almost instantaneously. I turned for another look at the blue
night, and it was gone. Everywhere the birds began to call, and all
manner of little insects began to chirp and hop about in the willows.
A breeze sprang up from the west and brought the heavy smell of ripened
corn. The boys rolled over and shook themselves. We stripped and plunged
into the river just as the sun came up over the windy bluffs.

When I came home to Sandtown at Christmas time, we skated out to
our island and talked over the whole project of the Enchanted Bluff,
renewing our resolution to find it.


Although that was twenty years ago, none of us have ever climbed the
Enchanted Bluff. Percy Pound is a stockbroker in Kansas City and will go
nowhere that his red touring car cannot carry him. Otto Hassler went
on the railroad and lost his foot braking; after which he and Fritz
succeeded their father as the town tailors.

Arthur sat about the sleepy little town all his life--he died before he
was twenty-five. The last time I saw him, when I was home on one of my
college vacations, he was sitting in a steamer chair under a cottonwood
tree in the little yard behind one of the two Sandtown saloons. He was
very untidy and his hand was not steady, but when he rose, unabashed,
to greet me, his eyes were as clear and warm as ever. When I had talked
with him for an hour and heard him laugh again, I wondered how it was
that when Nature had taken such pains with a man, from his hands to the
arch of his long foot, she had ever lost him in Sandtown. He joked about
Tip Smith's Bluff, and declared he was going down there just as soon
as the weather got cooler; he thought the Grand Canyon might be worth
while, too.

I was perfectly sure when I left him that he would never get beyond
the high plank fence and the comfortable shade of the cottonwood. And,
indeed, it was under that very tree that he died one summer morning.

Tip Smith still talks about going to New Mexico. He married
a slatternly, unthrifty country girl, has been much tied to a
perambulator, and has grown stooped and grey from irregular meals and
broken sleep. But the worst of his difficulties are now over, and he
has, as he says, come into easy water. When I was last in Sandtown I
walked home with him late one moonlight night, after he had balanced his
cash and shut up his store. We took the long way around and sat down on
the schoolhouse steps, and between us we quite revived the romance of
the lone red rock and the extinct people. Tip insists that he still
means to go down there, but he thinks now he will wait until his boy
Bert is old enough to go with him. Bert has been let into the story, and
thinks of nothing but the Enchanted Bluff.






The Bohemian Girl

The transcontinental express swung along the windings of the Sand River
Valley, and in the rear seat of the observation car a young man sat
greatly at his ease, not in the least discomfited by the fierce sunlight
which beat in upon his brown face and neck and strong back. There was
a look of relaxation and of great passivity about his broad shoulders,
which seemed almost too heavy until he stood up and squared them. He
wore a pale flannel shirt and a blue silk necktie with loose ends. His
trousers were wide and belted at the waist, and his short sack coat hung
open. His heavy shoes had seen good service. His reddish-brown hair,
like his clothes, had a foreign cut. He had deep-set, dark blue eyes
under heavy reddish eyebrows. His face was kept clean only by close
shaving, and even the sharpest razor left a glint of yellow in the
smooth brown of his skin. His teeth and the palms of his hands were very
white. His head, which looked hard and stubborn, lay indolently in the
green cushion of the wicker chair, and as he looked out at the ripe
summer country a teasing, not unkindly smile played over his lips.
Once, as he basked thus comfortably, a quick light flashed in his eyes,
curiously dilating the pupils, and his mouth became a hard, straight
line, gradually relaxing into its former smile of rather kindly mockery.
He told himself, apparently, that there was no point in getting excited;
and he seemed a master hand at taking his ease when he could. Neither
the sharp whistle of the locomotive nor the brakeman's call disturbed
him. It was not until after the train had stopped that he rose, put on
a Panama hat, took from the rack a small valise and a flute case, and
stepped deliberately to the station platform. The baggage was already
unloaded, and the stranger presented a check for a battered sole-leather
steamer trunk.

“Can you keep it here for a day or two ?” he asked the agent. “I may send
for it, and I may not.”

“Depends on whether you like the country, I suppose ?” demanded the agent
in a challenging tone.

“Just so.”

The agent shrugged his shoulders, looked scornfully at the small trunk,
which was marked “N.E.,” and handed out a claim check without further
comment. The stranger watched him as he caught one end of the trunk and
dragged it into the express room. The agent's manner seemed to remind
him of something amusing. “Doesn't seem to be a very big place,” he
remarked, looking about.

“It's big enough for us,” snapped the agent, as he banged the trunk into
a corner.

That remark, apparently, was what Nils Ericson had wanted. He chuckled
quietly as he took a leather strap from his pocket and swung his valise
around his shoulder. Then he settled his Panama securely on his head,
turned up his trousers, tucked the flute case under his arm, and started
off across the fields. He gave the town, as he would have said, a wide
berth, and cut through a great fenced pasture, emerging, when he rolled
under the barbed wire at the farther corner, upon a white dusty road
which ran straight up from the river valley to the high prairies, where
the ripe wheat stood yellow and the tin roofs and weathercocks were
twinkling in the fierce sunlight. By the time Nils had done three miles,
the sun was sinking and the farm wagons on their way home from town came
rattling by, covering him with dust and making him sneeze. When one of
the farmers pulled up and offered to give him a lift, he clambered in
willingly. The driver was a thin, grizzled old man with a long lean
neck and a foolish sort of beard, like a goat's. “How fur ye goin' ?” he
asked, as he clucked to his horses and started off.

“Do you go by the Ericson place ?”

“Which Ericson ?” The old man drew in his reins as if he expected to stop
again.

“Preacher Ericson's.”

“Oh, the Old Lady Ericson's!” He turned and looked at Nils. “La, me! If
you're goin' out there you might a' rid out in the automobile. That's a
pity, now. The Old Lady Ericson was in town with her auto. You might 'a'
heard it snortin' anywhere about the post-office er the butcher shop.”

“Has she a motor ?” asked the stranger absently.

“'Deed an' she has! She runs into town every night about this time for
her mail and meat for supper. Some folks say she's afraid her auto won't
get exercise enough, but I say that's jealousy.”

“Aren't there any other motors about here ?”

“Oh, yes! we have fourteen in all. But nobody else gets around like
the Old Lady Ericson. She's out, rain er shine, over the whole county,
chargin' into town and out amongst her farms, an' up to her sons'
places. Sure you ain't goin' to the wrong place ?” He craned his neck and
looked at Nils' flute case with eager curiosity. “The old woman ain't
got any piany that I knows on. Olaf, he has a grand. His wife's musical:
took lessons in Chicago.”

“I'm going up there tomorrow,” said Nils imperturbably. He saw that the
driver took him for a piano tuner.

“Oh, I see!” The old man screwed up his eyes mysteriously. He was a
little dashed by the stranger's noncommunicativeness, but he soon broke
out again.

“I'm one o' Miss Ericson's tenants. Look after one of her places. I did
own the place myself once, but I lost it a while back, in the bad years
just after the World's Fair. Just as well, too, I say. Lets you out o'
payin' taxes. The Ericsons do own most of the county now. I remember
the old preacher's favorite text used to be, 'To them that hath shall be
given.' They've spread something wonderful--run over this here country
like bindweed. But I ain't one that begretches it to 'em. Folks is
entitled to what they kin git; and they're hustlers. Olaf, he's in the
Legislature now, and a likely man fur Congress. Listen, if that ain't
the old woman comin' now. Want I should stop her ?”

Nils shook his head. He heard the deep chug-chug of a motor vibrating
steadily in the clear twilight behind them. The pale lights of the car
swam over the hill, and the old man slapped his reins and turned clear
out of the road, ducking his head at the first of three angry snorts
from behind. The motor was running at a hot, even speed, and passed
without turning an inch from its course. The driver was a stalwart woman
who sat at ease in the front seat and drove her car bareheaded. She left
a cloud of dust and a trail of gasoline behind her. Her tenant threw
back his head and sneezed.

“Whew! I sometimes say I'd as lief be _before_ Mrs. Ericson as behind
her. She does beat all! Nearly seventy, and never lets another soul
touch that car. Puts it into commission herself every morning, and keeps
it tuned up by the hitch-bar all day. I never stop work for a drink
o' water that I don't hear her a-churnin' up the road. I reckon her
darter-in-laws never sets down easy nowadays. Never know when she'll pop
in. Mis' Otto, she says to me: 'We're so afraid that thing'll blow up
and do Ma some injury yet, she's so turrible venturesome.' Says I: 'I
wouldn't stew, Mis' Otto; the old lady'll drive that car to the funeral
of every darter-in-law she's got.' That was after the old woman had
jumped a turrible bad culvert.”

The stranger heard vaguely what the old man was saying. Just now he was
experiencing something very much like homesickness, and he was wondering
what had brought it about. The mention of a name or two, perhaps;
the rattle of a wagon along a dusty road; the rank, resinous smell of
sunflowers and ironweed, which the night damp brought up from the draws
and low places; perhaps, more than all, the dancing lights of the motor
that had plunged by. He squared his shoulders with a comfortable sense
of strength.

The wagon, as it jolted westward, climbed a pretty steady up-grade. The
country, receding from the rough river valley, swelled more and more
gently, as if it had been smoothed out by the wind. On one of the last
of the rugged ridges, at the end of a branch road, stood a grim square
house with a tin roof and double porches. Behind the house stretched a
row of broken, wind-racked poplars, and down the hill slope to the left
straggled the sheds and stables. The old man stopped his horses where
the Ericsons' road branched across a dry sand creek that wound about the
foot of the hill.

“That's the old lady's place. Want I should drive in ?” “No, thank you.
I'll roll out here. Much obliged to you. Good night.”

His passenger stepped down over the front wheel, and the old man drove
on reluctantly, looking back as if he would like to see how the stranger
would be received.

As Nils was crossing the dry creek he heard the restive tramp of a horse
coming toward him down the hill. Instantly he flashed out of the road
and stood behind a thicket of wild plum bushes that grew in the sandy
bed. Peering through the dusk, he saw a light horse, under tight
rein, descending the hill at a sharp walk. The rider was a slender
woman--barely visible against the dark hillside--wearing an
old-fashioned derby hat and a long riding skirt. She sat lightly in the
saddle, with her chin high, and seemed to be looking into the distance.
As she passed the plum thicket her horse snuffed the air and shied.
She struck him, pulling him in sharply, with an angry exclamation,
_“Blazne!”_ in Bohemian. Once in the main road, she let him out into
a lope, and they soon emerged upon the crest of high land, where they
moved along the skyline, silhouetted against the band of faint colour
that lingered in the west. This horse and rider, with their free,
rhythmical gallop, were the only moving things to be seen on the face of
the flat country. They seemed, in the last sad light of evening, not to
be there accidentally, but as an inevitable detail of the landscape.

Nils watched them until they had shrunk to a mere moving speck against
the sky, then he crossed the sand creek and climbed the hill. When
he reached the gate the front of the house was dark, but a light was
shining from the side windows. The pigs were squealing in the hog
corral, and Nils could see a tall boy, who carried two big wooden
buckets, moving about among them. Halfway between the barn and the
house, the windmill wheezed lazily. Following the path that ran around
to the back porch, Nils stopped to look through the screen door into
the lamplit kitchen. The kitchen was the largest room in the house; Nils
remembered that his older brothers used to give dances there when he was
a boy. Beside the stove stood a little girl with two light yellow braids
and a broad, flushed face, peering anxiously into a frying pan. In the
dining-room beyond, a large, broad-shouldered woman was moving about the
table. She walked with an active, springy step. Her face was heavy and
florid, almost without wrinkles, and her hair was black at seventy.
Nils felt proud of her as he watched her deliberate activity; never a
momentary hesitation, or a movement that did not tell. He waited until
she came out into the kitchen and, brushing the child aside, took her
place at the stove. Then he tapped on the screen door and entered.

“It's nobody but Nils, Mother. I expect you weren't looking for me.”

Mrs. Ericson turned away from the stove and stood staring at him. “Bring
the lamp, Hilda, and let me look.”

Nils laughed and unslung his valise. “What's the matter, Mother ? Don't
you know me ?”

Mrs. Ericson put down the lamp. “You must be Nils. You don't look very
different, anyway.”

“Nor you, Mother. You hold your own. Don't you wear glasses yet ?”

“Only to read by. Where's your trunk, Nils ?”

“Oh, I left that in town. I thought it might not be convenient for you
to have company so near threshing-time.”

“Don't be foolish, Nils.” Mrs. Ericson turned back to the stove. “I
don't thresh now. I hitched the wheat land onto the next farm and have
a tenant. Hilda, take some hot water up to the company room, and go call
little Eric.”

The tow-haired child, who had been standing in mute amazement, took up
the tea-kettle and withdrew, giving Nils a long, admiring look from the
door of the kitchen stairs.

“Who's the youngster ?” Nils asked, dropping down on the bench behind the
kitchen stove.

“One of your Cousin Henrik's.”

“How long has Cousin Henrik been dead ?”

“Six years. There are two boys. One stays with Peter and one with
Anders. Olaf is their guardeen.”

There was a clatter of pails on the porch, and a tall, lanky boy peered
wonderingly in through the screen door. He had a fair, gentle face and
big grey eyes, and wisps of soft yellow hair hung down under his cap.
Nils sprang up and pulled him into the kitchen, hugging him and slapping
him on the shoulders. “Well, if it isn't my kid! Look at the size of
him! Don't you know me, Eric ?”

The boy reddened tinder his sunburn and freckles, and hung his head. “I
guess it's Nils,” he said shyly.

“You're a good guesser,” laughed Nils giving the lad's hand a swing. To
himself he was thinking: “That's why the little girl looked so friendly.
He's taught her to like me. He was only six when I went away, and he's
remembered for twelve years.”

Eric stood fumbling with his cap and smiling. “You look just like I
thought you would,” he ventured.

“Go wash your hands, Eric,” called Mrs. Ericson. “I've got cob corn for
supper, Nils. You used to like it. I guess you don't get much of that in
the old country. Here's Hilda; she'll take you up to your room. You'll
want to get the dust off you before you eat.”

Mrs. Ericson went into the dining-room to lay another plate, and the
little girl came up and nodded to Nils as if to let him know that his
room was ready. He put out his hand and she took it, with a startled
glance up at his face. Little Eric dropped his towel, threw an arm about
Nils and one about Hilda, gave them a clumsy squeeze, and then stumbled
out to the porch.

During supper Nils heard exactly how much land each of his eight grown
brothers farmed, how their crops were coming on, and how much livestock
they were feeding. His mother watched him narrowly as she talked.
“You've got better looking, Nils,” she remarked abruptly, whereupon he
grinned and the children giggled. Eric, although he was eighteen and as
tall as Nils, was always accounted a child, being the last of so many
sons. His face seemed childlike, too, Nils thought, and he had the open,
wandering eyes of a little boy. All the others had been men at his age.

After supper Nils went out to the front porch and sat down on the step
to smoke a pipe. Mrs. Ericson drew a rocking-chair up near him and began
to knit busily. It was one of the few Old World customs she had kept up,
for she could not bear to sit with idle hands.

“Where's little Eric, Mother ?”

“He's helping Hilda with the dishes. He does it of his own will; I don't
like a boy to be too handy about the house.”

“He seems like a nice kid.”

“He's very obedient.”

Nils smiled a little in the dark. It was just as well to shift the line
of conversation. “What are you knitting there, Mother ?”

“Baby stockings. The boys keep me busy.” Mrs. Ericson chuckled and
clicked her needles.

“How many grandchildren have you ?”

“Only thirty-one now. Olaf lost his three. They were sickly, like their
mother.”

“I supposed he had a second crop by this time!”

“His second wife has no children. She's too proud. She tears about on
horseback all the time. But she'll get caught up with, yet. She sets
herself very high, though nobody knows what for. They were low enough
Bohemians she came of. I never thought much of Bohemians; always
drinking.”

Nils puffed away at his pipe in silence, and Mrs. Ericson knitted on. In
a few moments she added grimly: “She was down here tonight, just before
you came. She'd like to quarrel with me and come between me and Olaf,
but I don't give her the chance. I suppose you'll be bringing a wife
home some day.”

“I don't know. I've never thought much about it.”

“Well, perhaps it's best as it is,” suggested Mrs. Ericson hopefully.
“You'd never be contented tied down to the land. There was roving blood
in your father's family, and it's come out in you. I expect your own
way of life suits you best.” Mrs. Ericson had dropped into a blandly
agreeable tone which Nils well remembered. It seemed to amuse him a
good deal and his white teeth flashed behind his pipe. His mother's
strategies had always diverted him, even when he was a boy--they were so
flimsy and patent, so illy proportioned to her vigor and force. “They've
been waiting to see which way I'd jump,” he reflected. He felt that Mrs.
Ericson was pondering his case deeply as she sat clicking her needles.

“I don't suppose you've ever got used to steady work,” she went on
presently. “Men ain't apt to if they roam around too long. It's a pity
you didn't come back the year after the World's Fair. Your father picked
up a good bit of land cheap then, in the hard times, and I expect maybe
he'd have give you a farm, it's too bad you put off comin' back so long,
for I always thought he meant to do something by you.”

Nils laughed and shook the ashes out of his pipe. “I'd have missed a lot
if I had come back then. But I'm sorry I didn't get back to see father.”

“Well, I suppose we have to miss things at one end or the other. Perhaps
you are as well satisfied with your own doings, now, as you'd have been
with a farm,” said Mrs. Ericson reassuringly.

“Land's a good thing to have,” Nils commented, as he lit another match
and sheltered it with his hand.

His mother looked sharply at his face until the match burned out. “Only
when you stay on it!” she hastened to say.

Eric came round the house by the path just then, and Nils rose, with a
yawn. “Mother, if you don't mind, Eric and I will take a little tramp
before bedtime. It will make me sleep.”

“Very well; only don't stay long. I'll sit up and wait for you. I like
to lock up myself.”

Nils put his hand on Eric's shoulder, and the two tramped down the hill
and across the sand creek into the dusty highroad beyond. Neither spoke.
They swung along at an even gait, Nils puffing at his pipe. There was no
moon, and the white road and the wide fields lay faint in the starlight.
Over everything was darkness and thick silence, and the smell of dust
and sunflowers. The brothers followed the road for a mile or more
without finding a place to sit down. Finally, Nils perched on a stile
over the wire fence, and Eric sat on the lower step.

“I began to think you never would come back, Nils,” said the boy softly.

“Didn't I promise you I would ?”

“Yes; but people don't bother about promises they make to babies. Did
you really know you were going away for good when you went to Chicago
with the cattle that time ?”

“I thought it very likely, if I could make my way.”

“I don't see how you did it, Nils. Not many fellows could.” Eric rubbed
his shoulder against his brother's knee.

“The hard thing was leaving home you and father. It was easy enough,
once I got beyond Chicago. Of course I got awful homesick; used to cry
myself to sleep. But I'd burned my bridges.”

“You had always wanted to go, hadn't you ?”

“Always. Do you still sleep in our little room ? Is that cottonwood still
by the window ?”

Eric nodded eagerly and smiled up at his brother in the grey darkness.

“You remember how we always said the leaves were whispering when they
rustled at night ? Well, they always whispered to me about the sea.
Sometimes they said names out of the geography books. In a high wind
they had a desperate sound, like someone trying to tear loose.”

“How funny, Nils,” said Eric dreamily, resting his chin on his hand.
“That tree still talks like that, and 'most always it talks to me about
you.”

They sat a while longer, watching the stars. At last Eric whispered
anxiously: “Hadn't we better go back now ? Mother will get tired waiting
for us.” They rose and took a short cut home, through the pasture.


                           II

The next morning Nils woke with the first flood of light that came with
dawn. The white-plastered walls of his room reflected the glare that
shone through the thin window shades, and he found it impossible to
sleep. He dressed hurriedly and slipped down the hall and up the back
stairs to the half-story room which he used to share with his little
brother. Eric, in a skimpy nightshirt, was sitting on the edge of the
bed, rubbing his eyes, his pale yellow hair standing up in tufts all
over his head. When he saw Nils, he murmured something confusedly and
hustled his long legs into his trousers. “I didn't expect you'd be up so
early, Nils,” he said, as his head emerged from his blue shirt.

“Oh, you thought I was a dude, did you ?” Nils gave him a playful tap
which bent the tall boy up like a clasp knife. “See here: I must teach
you to box.” Nils thrust his hands into his pockets and walked about.
“You haven't changed things much up here. Got most of my old traps,
haven't you ?”

He took down a bent, withered piece of sapling that hung over the
dresser. “If this isn't the stick Lou Sandberg killed himself with!”

The boy looked up from his shoe-lacing.

“Yes; you never used to let me play with that. Just how did he do it,
Nils ? You were with father when he found Lou, weren't you ?”

“Yes. Father was going off to preach somewhere, and, as we drove along,
Lou's place looked sort of forlorn, and we thought we'd stop and cheer
him up. When we found him father said he'd been dead a couple days. He'd
tied a piece of binding twine round his neck, made a noose in each end,
fixed the nooses over the ends of a bent stick, and let the stick spring
straight; strangled himself.”

“What made him kill himself such a silly way ?”

The simplicity of the boy's question set Nils laughing. He clapped
little Eric on the shoulder. “What made him such a silly as to kill
himself at all, I should say!”

“Oh, well! But his hogs had the cholera, and all up and died on him,
didn't they ?”

“Sure they did; but he didn't have cholera; and there were plenty of
hogs left in the world, weren't there ?”

“Well, but, if they weren't his, how could they do him any good ?” Eric
asked, in astonishment.

“Oh, scat! He could have had lots of fun with other people's hogs. He
was a chump, Lou Sandberg. To kill yourself for a pig--think of that,
now!” Nils laughed all the way downstairs, and quite embarrassed little
Eric, who fell to scrubbing his face and hands at the tin basin. While
he was parting his wet hair at the kitchen looking glass, a heavy tread
sounded on the stairs. The boy dropped his comb. “Gracious, there's
Mother. We must have talked too long.” He hurried out to the shed,
slipped on his overalls, and disappeared with the milking pails.

Mrs. Ericson came in, wearing a clean white apron, her black hair
shining from the application of a wet brush.

“Good morning, Mother. Can't I make the fire for you ?”

“No, thank you, Nils. It's no trouble to make a cob fire, and I like to
manage the kitchen stove myself” Mrs. Ericson paused with a shovel full
of ashes in her hand. “I expect you will be wanting to see your brothers
as soon as possible. I'll take you up to Anders' place this morning.
He's threshing, and most of our boys are over there.”

“Will Olaf be there ?”

Mrs. Ericson went on taking out the ashes, and spoke between shovels.
“No; Olaf's wheat is all in, put away in his new barn. He got six
thousand bushel this year. He's going to town today to get men to finish
roofing his barn.”

“So Olaf is building a new barn ?” Nils asked absently.

“Biggest one in the county, and almost done. You'll likely be here for
the barn-raising. He's going to have a supper and a dance as soon as
everybody's done threshing. Says it keeps the voters in good humour. I
tell him that's all nonsense; but Olaf has a head for politics.”

“Does Olaf farm all Cousin Henrik's land ?”

Mrs. Ericson frowned as she blew into the faint smoke curling up about
the cobs. “Yes; he holds it in trust for the children, Hilda and her
brothers. He keeps strict account of everything he raises on it, and
puts the proceeds out at compound interest for them.”

Nils smiled as he watched the little flames shoot up. The door of the
back stairs opened, and Hilda emerged, her arms behind her, buttoning
up her long gingham apron as she came. He nodded to her gaily, and she
twinkled at him out of her little blue eyes, set far apart over her wide
cheekbones.

“There, Hilda, you grind the coffee--and just put in an extra handful;
I expect your Cousin Nils likes his strong,” said Mrs. Ericson, as she
went out to the shed.

Nils turned to look at the little girl, who gripped the coffee grinder
between her knees and ground so hard that her two braids bobbed and her
face flushed under its broad spattering of freckles. He noticed on her
middle finger something that had not been there last night, and that had
evidently been put on for company: a tiny gold ring with a clumsily set
garnet stone. As her hand went round and round he touched the ring with
the tip of his finger, smiling.

Hilda glanced toward the shed door through which Mrs. Ericson had
disappeared. “My Cousin Clara gave me that,” she whispered bashfully.
“She's Cousin Olaf's wife.”


                           III

Mrs. Olaf Ericson--Clara Vavrika, as many people still called her--was
moving restlessly about her big bare house that morning. Her husband had
left for the county town before his wife was out of bed--her lateness
in rising was one of the many things the Ericson family had against her.
Clara seldom came downstairs before eight o'clock, and this morning
she was even later, for she had dressed with unusual care. She put
on, however, only a tight-fitting black dress, which people thereabouts
thought very plain. She was a tall, dark woman of thirty, with a rather
sallow complexion and a touch of dull salmon red in her cheeks, where
the blood seemed to burn under her brown skin. Her hair, parted evenly
above her low forehead, was so black that there were distinctly blue
lights in it. Her black eyebrows were delicate half-moons and her lashes
were long and heavy. Her eyes slanted a little, as if she had a strain
of Tartar or gypsy blood, and were sometimes full of fiery determination
and sometimes dull and opaque. Her expression was never altogether
amiable; was often, indeed, distinctly sullen, or, when she was
animated, sarcastic. She was most attractive in profile, for then one
saw to advantage her small, well-shaped head and delicate ears, and felt
at once that here was a very positive, if not an altogether pleasing,
personality.

The entire management of Mrs. Olaf's household devolved upon her aunt,
Johanna Vavrika, a superstitious, doting woman of fifty. When Clara
was a little girl her mother died, and Johanna's life had been spent
in ungrudging service to her niece. Clara, like many self-willed and
discontented persons, was really very apt, without knowing it, to do
as other people told her, and to let her destiny be decided for her
by intelligences much below her own. It was her Aunt Johanna who had
humoured and spoiled her in her girlhood, who had got her off to Chicago
to study piano, and who had finally persuaded her to marry Olaf Ericson
as the best match she would be likely to make in that part of the
country. Johanna Vavrika had been deeply scarred by smallpox in the old
country. She was short and fat, homely and jolly and sentimental.
She was so broad, and took such short steps when she walked, that her
brother, Joe Vavrika, always called her his duck. She adored her niece
because of her talent, because of her good looks and masterful ways, but
most of all because of her selfishness.

Clara's marriage with Olaf Ericson was Johanna's particular triumph. She
was inordinately proud of Olaf's position, and she found a sufficiently
exciting career in managing Clara's house, in keeping it above the
criticism of the Ericsons, in pampering Olaf to keep him from finding
fault with his wife, and in concealing from every one Clara's domestic
infelicities. While Clara slept of a morning, Johanna Vavrika was
bustling about, seeing that Olaf and the men had their breakfast, and
that the cleaning or the butter-making or the washing was properly begun
by the two girls in the kitchen. Then, at about eight o'clock, she would
take Clara's coffee up to her, and chat with her while she drank it,
telling her what was going on in the house. Old Mrs. Ericson frequently
said that her daughter-in-law would not know what day of the week it
was if Johanna did not tell her every morning. Mrs. Ericson despised and
pitied Johanna, but did not wholly dislike her. The one thing she hated
in her daughter-in-law above everything else was the way in which Clara
could come it over people. It enraged her that the affairs of her son's
big, barnlike house went on as well as they did, and she used to feel
that in this world we have to wait overlong to see the guilty punished.
“Suppose Johanna Vavrika died or got sick ?” the old lady used to say to
Olaf. “Your wife wouldn't know where to look for her own dish-cloth.”
 Olaf only shrugged his shoulders. The fact remained that Johanna did not
die, and, although Mrs. Ericson often told her she was looking poorly,
she was never ill. She seldom left the house, and she slept in a little
room off the kitchen. No Ericson, by night or day, could come prying
about there to find fault without her knowing it. Her one weakness was
that she was an incurable talker, and she sometimes made trouble without
meaning to.

This morning Clara was tying a wine-coloured ribbon about her throat
when Johanna appeared with her coffee. After putting the tray on a
sewing table, she began to make Clara's bed, chattering the while in
Bohemian.

“Well, Olaf got off early, and the girls are baking. I'm going down
presently to make some poppy-seed bread for Olaf. He asked for prune
preserves at breakfast, and I told him I was out of them, and to bring
some prunes and honey and cloves from town.”

Clara poured her coffee. “Ugh! I don't see how men can eat so much sweet
stuff. In the morning, too!”

Her aunt chuckled knowingly. “Bait a bear with honey, as we say in the
old country.”

“Was he cross ?” her niece asked indifferently.

“Olaf ? Oh, no! He was in fine spirits. He's never cross if you know how
to take him. I never knew a man to make so little fuss about bills. I
gave him a list of things to get a yard long, and he didn't say a word;
just folded it up and put it in his pocket.”

“I can well believe he didn't say a word,” Clara remarked with a shrug.
“Some day he'll forget how to talk.”

“Oh, but they say he's a grand speaker in the Legislature. He knows
when to keep quiet. That's why he's got such influence in politics. The
people have confidence in him.” Johanna beat up a pillow and held it
under her fat chin while she slipped on the case. Her niece laughed.

“Maybe we could make people believe we were wise, Aunty, if we held our
tongues. Why did you tell Mrs. Ericson that Norman threw me again last
Saturday and turned my foot ? She's been talking to Olaf.”

Johanna fell into great confusion. “Oh, but, my precious, the old lady
asked for you, and she's always so angry if I can't give an excuse.
Anyhow, she needn't talk; she's always tearing up something with that
motor of hers.”

When her aunt clattered down to the kitchen, Clara went to dust the
parlour. Since there was not much there to dust, this did not take very
long. Olaf had built the house new for her before their marriage, but
her interest in furnishing it had been short-lived. It went, indeed,
little beyond a bathtub and her piano. They had disagreed about almost
every other article of furniture, and Clara had said she would rather
have her house empty than full of things she didn't want. The house was
set in a hillside, and the west windows of the parlour looked out above
the kitchen yard thirty feet below. The east windows opened directly
into the front yard. At one of the latter, Clara, while she was dusting,
heard a low whistle. She did not turn at once, but listened intently as
she drew her cloth slowly along the round of a chair. Yes, there it was:

I dreamt that I dwelt in ma-a-arble halls.

She turned and saw Nils Ericson laughing in the sunlight, his hat in his
hand, just outside the window. As she crossed the room he leaned against
the wire screen. “Aren't you at all surprised to see me, Clara Vavrika ?”

“No; I was expecting to see you. Mother Ericson telephoned Olaf last
night that you were here.”

Nils squinted and gave a long whistle. “Telephoned ? That must have been
while Eric and I were out walking. Isn't she enterprising ? Lift this
screen, won't you ?”

Clara lifted the screen, and Nils swung his leg across the window-sill.
As he stepped into the room she said: “You didn't think you were going
to get ahead of your mother, did you ?”

He threw his hat on the piano. “Oh, I do sometimes. You see, I'm ahead
of her now. I'm supposed to be in Anders' wheat-field. But, as we were
leaving, Mother ran her car into a soft place beside the road and sank
up to the hubs. While they were going for the horses to pull her out,
I cut away behind the stacks and escaped.” Nils chuckled. Clara's dull
eyes lit up as she looked at him admiringly.

“You've got them guessing already. I don't know what your mother said
to Olaf over the telephone, but be came back looking as if he'd seen
a ghost, and he didn't go to bed until a dreadful hour--ten o'clock, I
should think. He sat out on the porch in the dark like a graven image.
It had been one of his talkative days, too.” They both laughed, easily
and lightly, like people who have laughed a great deal together; but
they remained standing.

“Anders and Otto and Peter looked as if they had seen ghosts, too, over
in the threshing field. What's the matter with them all ?”

Clara gave him a quick, searching look. “Well, for one thing, they've
always been afraid you have the other will.”

Nils looked interested. “The other will ?”

“Yes. A later one. They knew your father made another, but they never
knew what he did with it. They almost tore the old house to pieces
looking for it. They always suspected that he carried on a clandestine
correspondence with you, for the one thing he would do was to get his
own mail himself. So they thought he might have sent the new will to
you for safekeeping. The old one, leaving everything to your mother, was
made long before you went away, and it's understood among them that it
cuts you out--that she will leave all the property to the others. Your
father made the second will to prevent that. I've been hoping you
had it. It would be such fun to spring it on them.” Clara laughed
mirthfully, a thing she did not often do now.

Nils shook his head reprovingly. “Come, now, you're malicious.”

“No, I'm not. But I'd like something to happen to stir them all up, just
for once. There never was such a family for having nothing ever happen
to them but dinner and threshing. I'd almost be willing to die, just to
have a funeral. _You_ wouldn't stand it for three weeks.”

Nils bent over the piano and began pecking at the keys with the finger
of one hand. “I wouldn't ? My dear young lady, how do you know what I can
stand ? _You_ wouldn't wait to find out.”

Clara flushed darkly and frowned. “I didn't believe you would ever come
back--” she said defiantly.

“Eric believed I would, and he was only a baby when I went away.
However, all's well that ends well, and I haven't come back to be a
skeleton at the feast. We mustn't quarrel. Mother will be here with a
search warrant pretty soon.” He swung round and faced her, thrusting his
hands into his coat pockets. “Come, you ought to be glad to see me, if
you want something to happen. I'm something, even without a will. We can
have a little fun, can't we ? I think we can!”

She echoed him, “I think we can!” They both laughed and their eyes
sparkled. Clara Vavrika looked ten years younger than when she had put
the velvet ribbon about her throat that morning.

“You know, I'm so tickled to see mother,” Nils went on. “I didn't know
I was so proud of her. A regular pile driver. How about little pigtails,
down at the house ? Is Olaf doing the square thing by those children ?”

Clara frowned pensively. “Olaf has to do something that looks like the
square thing, now that he's a public man!” She glanced drolly at Nils.
“But he makes a good commission out of it. On Sundays they all get
together here and figure. He lets Peter and Anders put in big bills for
the keep of the two boys, and he pays them out of the estate. They are
always having what they call accountings. Olaf gets something out of
it, too. I don't know just how they do it, but it's entirely a family
matter, as they say. And when the Ericsons say that--” Clara lifted her
eyebrows.

Just then the angry _honk-honk_ of an approaching motor sounded from
down the road. Their eyes met and they began to laugh. They laughed as
children do when they can not contain themselves, and can not explain
the cause of their mirth to grown people, but share it perfectly
together. When Clara Vavrika sat down at the piano after he was gone,
she felt that she had laughed away a dozen years. She practised as if
the house were burning over her head.

When Nils greeted his mother and climbed into the front seat of the
motor beside her, Mrs. Ericson looked grim, but she made no comment
upon his truancy until she had turned her car and was retracing her
revolutions along the road that ran by Olaf's big pasture. Then she
remarked dryly:

“If I were you I wouldn't see too much of Olaf's wife while you are
here. She's the kind of woman who can't see much of men without getting
herself talked about. She was a good deal talked about before he married
her.”

“Hasn't Olaf tamed her ?” Nils asked indifferently.

Mrs. Ericson shrugged her massive shoulders. “Olaf don't seem to have
much luck, when it comes to wives. The first one was meek enough, but
she was always ailing. And this one has her own way. He says if he
quarreled with her she'd go back to her father, and then he'd lose the
Bohemian vote. There are a great many Bohunks in this district. But when
you find a man under his wife's thumb you can always be sure there's a
soft spot in him somewhere.”

Nils thought of his own father, and smiled. “She brought him a good deal
of money, didn't she, besides the Bohemian vote ?”

Mrs. Ericson sniffed. “Well, she has a fair half section in her own
name, but I can't see as that does Olaf much good. She will have a good
deal of property some day, if old Vavrika don't marry again. But I don't
consider a saloonkeeper's money as good as other people's money.”

Nils laughed outright. “Come, Mother, don't let your prejudices carry
you that far. Money's money. Old Vavrika's a mighty decent sort of
saloonkeeper. Nothing rowdy about him.”

Mrs. Ericson spoke up angrily. “Oh, I know you always stood up for them!
But hanging around there when you were a boy never did you any good,
Nils, nor any of the other boys who went there. There weren't so many
after her when she married Olaf, let me tell you. She knew enough to
grab her chance.”

Nils settled back in his seat. “Of course I liked to go there, Mother,
and you were always cross about it. You never took the trouble to find
out that it was the one jolly house in this country for a boy to go to.
All the rest of you were working yourselves to death, and the houses
were mostly a mess, full of babies and washing and flies. Oh, it was all
right--I understand that; but you are young only once, and I happened
to be young then. Now, Vavrika's was always jolly. He played the violin,
and I used to take my flute, and Clara played the piano, and
Johanna used to sing Bohemian songs. She always had a big supper for
us--herrings and pickles and poppy-seed bread, and lots of cake and
preserves. Old Joe had been in the army in the old country, and he could
tell lots of good stories. I can see him cutting bread, at the head of
the table, now. I don't know what I'd have done when I was a kid if it
hadn't been for the Vavrikas, really.”

“And all the time he was taking money that other people had worked hard
in the fields for,” Mrs. Ericson observed.

“So do the circuses, Mother, and they're a good thing. People ought to
get fun for some of their money. Even father liked old Joe.”

“Your father,” Mrs. Ericson said grimly, “liked everybody.”

As they crossed the sand creek and turned into her own place, Mrs.
Ericson observed, “There's Olaf's buggy. He's stopped on his way from
town.” Nils shook himself and prepared to greet his brother, who was
waiting on the porch.

Olaf was a big, heavy Norwegian, slow of speech and movement. His head
was large and square, like a block of wood. When Nils, at a distance,
tried to remember what his brother looked like, he could recall only his
heavy head, high forehead, large nostrils, and pale blue eyes, set far
apart. Olaf's features were rudimentary: the thing one noticed was the
face itself, wide and flat and pale; devoid of any expression, betraying
his fifty years as little as it betrayed anything else, and powerful by
reason of its very stolidness. When Olaf shook hands with Nils he looked
at him from under his light eyebrows, but Nils felt that no one could
ever say what that pale look might mean. The one thing he had always
felt in Olaf was a heavy stubbornness, like the unyielding stickiness of
wet loam against the plow. He had always found Olaf the most difficult
of his brothers.

“How do you do, Nils ? Expect to stay with us long ?”

“Oh, I may stay forever,” Nils answered gaily. “I like this country
better than I used to.”

“There's been some work put into it since you left,” Olaf remarked.

“Exactly. I think it's about ready to live in now--and I'm about ready
to settle down.” Nils saw his brother lower his big head (“Exactly like
a bull,” he thought.) “Mother's been persuading me to slow down now, and
go in for farming,” he went on lightly.

Olaf made a deep sound in his throat. “Farming ain't learned in a day,”
 he brought out, still looking at the ground.

“Oh, I know! But I pick things up quickly.” Nils had not meant to
antagonize his brother, and he did not know now why he was doing it. “Of
course,” he went on, “I shouldn't expect to make a big success, as you
fellows have done. But then, I'm not ambitious. I won't want much. A
little land, and some cattle, maybe.”

Olaf still stared at the ground, his head down. He wanted to ask Nils
what he had been doing all these years, that he didn't have a business
somewhere he couldn't afford to leave; why he hadn't more pride than to
come back with only a little sole-leather trunk to show for himself, and
to present himself as the only failure in the family. He did not ask one
of these questions, but he made them all felt distinctly.

“Humph!” Nils thought. “No wonder the man never talks, when he can butt
his ideas into you like that without ever saying a word. I suppose he
uses that kind of smokeless powder on his wife all the time. But I guess
she has her innings.” He chuckled, and Olaf looked up. “Never mind
me, Olaf. I laugh without knowing why, like little Eric. He's another
cheerful dog.”

“Eric,” said Olaf slowly, “is a spoiled kid. He's just let his mother's
best cow go dry because he don't milk her right. I was hoping you'd take
him away somewhere and put him into business. If he don't do any good
among strangers, he never will.” This was a long speech for Olaf, and as
he finished it he climbed into his buggy.

Nils shrugged his shoulders. “Same old tricks,” he thought. “Hits from
behind you every time. What a whale of a man!” He turned and went round
to the kitchen, where his mother was scolding little Eric for letting
the gasoline get low.


                           IV

Joe Vavrika's saloon was not in the county seat, where Olaf and Mrs.
Ericson did their trading, but in a cheerfuller place, a little Bohemian
settlement which lay at the other end of the county, ten level miles
north of Olaf's farm. Clara rode up to see her father almost every day.
Vavrika's house was, so to speak, in the back yard of his saloon. The
garden between the two buildings was inclosed by a high board fence
as tight as a partition, and in summer Joe kept beer tables and wooden
benches among the gooseberry bushes under his little cherry tree. At
one of these tables Nils Ericson was seated in the late afternoon, three
days after his return home. Joe had gone in to serve a customer, and
Nils was lounging on his elbows, looking rather mournfully into his
half-emptied pitcher, when he heard a laugh across the little garden.
Clara, in her riding habit, was standing at the back door of the house,
under the grapevine trellis that old Joe had grown there long ago. Nils
rose.

“Come out and keep your father and me company. We've been gossiping all
afternoon. Nobody to bother us but the flies.”

She shook her head. “No, I never come out here any more. Olaf doesn't
like it. I must live up to my position, you know.”

“You mean to tell me you never come out and chat with the boys, as you
used to ? He _has_ tamed you! Who keeps up these flower-beds ?”

“I come out on Sundays, when father is alone, and read the Bohemian
papers to him. But I am never here when the bar is open. What have you
two been doing ?”

“Talking, as I told you. I've been telling him about my travels. I find
I can't talk much at home, not even to Eric.”

Clara reached up and poked with her riding-whip at a white moth that was
fluttering in the sunlight among the vine leaves. “I suppose you will
never tell me about all those things.”

“Where can I tell them ? Not in Olaf's house, certainly. What's the
matter with our talking here ?” He pointed persuasively with his hat
to the bushes and the green table, where the flies were singing lazily
above the empty beer glasses.

Clara shook her head weakly. “No, it wouldn't do. Besides, I am going
now.”

“I'm on Eric's mare. Would you be angry if I overtook you ?”

Clara looked back and laughed. “You might try and see. I can leave you
if I don't want you. Eric's mare can't keep up with Norman.”

Nils went into the bar and attempted to pay his score. Big Joe, six feet
four, with curly yellow hair and mustache, clapped him on the shoulder.
“Not a Goddamn a your money go in my drawer, you hear ? Only next time
you bring your flute, te-te-te-te-te-ty.” Joe wagged his fingers in
imitation of the flute player's position.

“My Clara, she come all-a-time Sundays an' play for me. She not like to
play at Ericson's place.” He shook his yellow curls and laughed. “Not a
Goddamn a fun at Ericson's. You come a Sunday. You like-a fun. No forget
de flute.” Joe talked very rapidly and always tumbled over his English.
He seldom spoke it to his customers, and had never learned much.

Nils swung himself into the saddle and trotted to the west of the
village, where the houses and gardens scattered into prairie land and
the road turned south. Far ahead of him, in the declining light, he saw
Clara Vavrika's slender figure, loitering on horseback. He touched his
mare with the whip, and shot along the white, level road, under the
reddening sky. When he overtook Olaf's wife he saw that she had been
crying. “What's the matter, Clara Vavrika ?” he asked kindly.

“Oh, I get blue sometimes. It was awfully jolly living there with
father. I wonder why I ever went away.”

Nils spoke in a low, kind tone that he sometimes used with women:
“That's what I've been wondering these many years. You were the last
girl in the country I'd have picked for a wife for Olaf. What made you
do it, Clara ?”

“I suppose I really did it to oblige the neighbours”--Clara tossed her
head. “People were beginning to wonder.”

“To wonder ?”

“Yes--why I didn't get married. I suppose I didn't like to keep them in
suspense. I've discovered that most girls marry out of consideration for
the neighbourhood.”

Nils bent his head toward her and his white teeth flashed. “I'd have
gambled that one girl I knew would say, 'Let the neighbourhood be
damned.'”

Clara shook her head mournfully. “You see, they have it on you, Nils;
that is, if you're a woman. They say you're beginning to go off. That's
what makes us get married: we can't stand the laugh.”

Nils looked sidewise at her. He had never seen her head droop before.
Resignation was the last thing he would have expected of her. “In your
case, there wasn't something else ?”

“Something else ?”

“I mean, you didn't do it to spite somebody ? Somebody who didn't come
back ?”

Clara drew herself up. “Oh, I never thought you'd come back. Not after
I stopped writing to you, at least. _That_ was all over, long before I
married Olaf.”

“It never occurred to you, then, that the meanest thing you could do to
me was to marry Olaf ?”

Clara laughed. “No; I didn't know you were so fond of Olaf.”

Nils smoothed his horse's mane with his glove. “You know, Clara Vavrika,
you are never going to stick it out. You'll cut away some day, and I've
been thinking you might as well cut away with me.”

Clara threw up her chin. “Oh, you don't know me as well as you think. I
won't cut away. Sometimes, when I'm with father, I feel like it. But I
can hold out as long as the Ericsons can. They've never got the best of
me yet, and one can live, so long as one isn't beaten. If I go back to
father, it's all up with Olaf in politics. He knows that, and he never
goes much beyond sulking. I've as much wit as the Ericsons. I'll never
leave them unless I can show them a thing or two.”

“You mean unless you can come it over them ?”

“Yes--unless I go away with a man who is cleverer than they are, and who
has more money.”

Nils whistled. “Dear me, you are demanding a good deal. The Ericsons,
take the lot of them, are a bunch to beat. But I should think the
excitement of tormenting them would have worn off by this time.”

“It has, I'm afraid,” Clara admitted mournfully.

“Then why don't you cut away ? There are more amusing games than this in
the world. When I came home I thought it might amuse me to bully a few
quarter sections out of the Ericsons; but I've almost decided I can get
more fun for my money somewhere else.”

Clara took in her breath sharply. “Ah, you have got the other will! That
was why you came home!”

“No, it wasn't. I came home to see how you were getting on with Olaf.”

Clara struck her horse with the whip, and in a bound she was far ahead
of him. Nils dropped one word, “Damn!” and whipped after her; but she
leaned forward in her saddle and fairly cut the wind. Her long riding
skirt rippled in the still air behind her. The sun was just sinking
behind the stubble in a vast, clear sky, and the shadows drew across the
fields so rapidly that Nils could scarcely keep in sight the dark figure
on the road. When he overtook her he caught her horse by the bridle.
Norman reared, and Nils was frightened for her; but Clara kept her seat.

“Let me go, Nils Ericson!” she cried. “I hate you more than any of
them. You were created to torture me, the whole tribe of you--to make me
suffer in every possible way.”

She struck her horse again and galloped away from him. Nils set his
teeth and looked thoughtful. He rode slowly home along the deserted
road, watching the stars come out in the clear violet sky.

They flashed softly into the limpid heavens, like jewels let fall into
clear water. They were a reproach, he felt, to a sordid world. As he
turned across the sand creek, he looked up at the North Star and smiled,
as if there were an understanding between them. His mother scolded him
for being late for supper.


                           V

On Sunday afternoon Joe Vavrika, in his shirt sleeves and carpet
slippers, was sitting in his garden, smoking a long-tasseled porcelain
pipe with a hunting scene painted on the bowl. Clara sat under the
cherry tree, reading aloud to him from the weekly Bohemian papers. She
had worn a white muslin dress under her riding habit, and the leaves
of the cherry tree threw a pattern of sharp shadows over her skirt. The
black cat was dozing in the sunlight at her feet, and Joe's dachshund
was scratching a hole under the scarlet geraniums and dreaming of
badgers. Joe was filling his pipe for the third time since dinner,
when he heard a knocking on the fence. He broke into a loud guffaw and
unlatched the little door that led into the street. He did not call Nils
by name, but caught him by the hand and dragged him in. Clara stiffened
and the colour deepened under her dark skin. Nils, too, felt a little
awkward. He had not seen her since the night when she rode away from him
and left him alone on the level road between the fields. Joe dragged him
to the wooden bench beside the green table.

“You bring de flute,” he cried, tapping the leather case under Nils'
arm. “Ah, das-a good' Now we have some liddle fun like old times. I got
somet'ing good for you.” Joe shook his finger at Nils and winked his
blue eye, a bright clear eye, full of fire, though the tiny bloodvessels
on the ball were always a little distended. “I got somet'ing for you
from”--he paused and waved his hand--“Hongarie. You know Hongarie ? You
wait!” He pushed Nils down on the bench, and went through the back door
of his saloon.

Nils looked at Clara, who sat frigidly with her white skirts drawn
tight about her. “He didn't tell you he had asked me to come, did he ?
He wanted a party and proceeded to arrange it. Isn't he fun ? Don't be
cross; let's give him a good time.”

Clara smiled and shook out her skirt. “Isn't that like Father ? And he
has sat here so meekly all day. Well, I won't pout. I'm glad you came.
He doesn't have very many good times now any more. There are so few of
his kind left. The second generation are a tame lot.”

Joe came back with a flask in one hand and three wine glasses caught by
the stems between the fingers of the other. These he placed on the table
with an air of ceremony, and, going behind Nils, held the flask between
him and the sun, squinting into it admiringly. “You know dis, Tokai ? A
great friend of mine, he bring dis to me, a present out of Hongarie. You
know how much it cost, dis wine ? Chust so much what it weigh in gold.
Nobody but de nobles drink him in Bohemie. Many, many years I save him
up, dis Tokai.” Joe whipped out his official corkscrew and delicately
removed the cork. “De old man die what bring him to me, an' dis wine he
lay on his belly in my cellar an' sleep. An' now,” carefully pouring
out the heavy yellow wine, “an' now he wake up; and maybe he wake us
up, too!” He carried one of the glasses to his daughter and presented it
with great gallantry.

Clara shook her head, but, seeing her father's disappointment, relented.
“You taste it first. I don't want so much.”

Joe sampled it with a beatific expression, and turned to Nils. “You
drink him slow, dis wine. He very soft, but he go down hot. You see!”

After a second glass Nils declared that he couldn't take any more
without getting sleepy. “Now get your fiddle, Vavrika,” he said as he
opened his flute case.

But Joe settled back in his wooden rocker and wagged his big carpet
slipper. “No-no-no-no-no-no-no! No play fiddle now any more: too much
ache in de finger,” waving them, “all-a-time rheumatic. You play de
flute, te-tety-tetety-te. Bohemie songs.”

“I've forgotten all the Bohemian songs I used to play with you and
Johanna. But here's one that will make Clara pout. You remember how her
eyes used to snap when we called her the Bohemian Girl ?” Nils lifted his
flute and began “When Other Lips and Other Hearts,” and Joe hummed the
air in a husky baritone, waving his carpet slipper. “Oh-h-h, das-a fine
music,” he cried, clapping his hands as Nils finished. “Now 'Marble
Halls, Marble Halls'! Clara, you sing him.”

Clara smiled and leaned back in her chair, beginning softly:

       “I dreamt that I dwelt in ma-a-arble halls,
          With vassals and serfs at my knee,”

and Joe hummed like a big bumblebee.

“There's one more you always played,” Clara said quietly, “I remember
that best.” She locked her hands over her knee and began “The Heart
Bowed Down,” and sang it through without groping for the words. She was
singing with a good deal of warmth when she came to the end of the old
song:

             “For memory is the only friend
             That grief can call its own.”

Joe flashed out his red silk handkerchief and blew his nose, shaking his
head. “No-no-no-no-no-no-no! Too sad, too sad! I not like-a dat. Play
quick somet'ing gay now.”

Nils put his lips to the instrument, and Joe lay back in his chair,
laughing and singing, “Oh, Evelina, Sweet Evelina!” Clara laughed, too.
Long ago, when she and Nils went to high school, the model student of
their class was a very homely girl in thick spectacles. Her name was
Evelina Oleson; she had a long, swinging walk which somehow suggested
the measure of that song, and they used mercilessly to sing it at her.

“Dat ugly Oleson girl, she teach in de school,” Joe gasped, “an' she
still walks chust like dat, yup-a, yup-a, yup-a, chust like a
camel she go! Now, Nils, we have some more li'l drink. Oh,
yes-yes-yes-yes-yes-yes-_yes_! Dis time you haf to drink, and Clara she
haf to, so she show she not jealous. So, we all drink to your girl. You
not tell her name, eh ? No-no-no, I no make you tell. She pretty, eh ? She
make good sweetheart ? I bet!” Joe winked and lifted his glass. “How soon
you get married ?”

Nils screwed up his eyes. “That I don't know. When she says.”

Joe threw out his chest. “Das-a way boys talks. No way for mans. Mans
say, 'You come to de church, an' get a hurry on you.' Das-a way mans
talks.”

“Maybe Nils hasn't got enough to keep a wife,” put in Clara ironically.
“How about that, Nils ?” she asked him frankly, as if she wanted to know.

Nils looked at her coolly, raising one eyebrow. “Oh, I can keep her, all
right.”

“The way she wants to be kept ?”

“With my wife, I'll decide that,” replied Nils calmly. “I'll give her
what's good for her.”

Clara made a wry face. “You'll give her the strap, I expect, like old
Peter Oleson gave his wife.”

“When she needs it,” said Nils lazily, locking his hands behind his head
and squinting up through the leaves of the cherry tree. “Do you remember
the time I squeezed the cherries all over your clean dress, and Aunt
Johanna boxed my ears for me ? My gracious, weren't you mad! You had both
hands full of cherries, and I squeezed 'em and made the juice fly all
over you. I liked to have fun with you; you'd get so mad.”

“We _did_ have fun, didn't we ? None of the other kids ever had so much
fun. We knew how to play.”

Nils dropped his elbows on the table and looked steadily across at her.
“I've played with lots of girls since, but I haven't found one who was
such good fun.”

Clara laughed. The late afternoon sun was shining full in her face,
and deep in the back of her eyes there shone something fiery, like the
yellow drops of Tokai in the brown glass bottle. “Can you still play, or
are you only pretending ?”

“I can play better than I used to, and harder.”

“Don't you ever work, then ?” She had not intended to say it. It slipped
out because she was confused enough to say just the wrong thing.

“I work between times.” Nils' steady gaze still beat upon her. “Don't
you worry about my working, Mrs. Ericson. You're getting like all the
rest of them.” He reached his brown, warm hand across the table and
dropped it on Clara's, which was cold as an icicle. “Last call for play,
Mrs. Ericson!” Clara shivered, and suddenly her hands and cheeks grew
warm. Her fingers lingered in his a moment, and they looked at each
other earnestly. Joe Vavrika had put the mouth of the bottle to his lips
and was swallowing the last drops of the Tokai, standing. The sun, just
about to sink behind his shop, glistened on the bright glass, on his
flushed face and curly yellow hair. “Look,” Clara whispered, “that's the
way I want to grow old.”


                           VI

On the day of Olaf Ericson's barn-raising, his wife, for once in a way,
rose early. Johanna Vavrika had been baking cakes and frying and boiling
and spicing meats for a week beforehand, but it was not until the day
before the party was to take place that Clara showed any interest in it.
Then she was seized with one of her fitful spasms of energy, and took
the wagon and little Eric and spent the day on Plum Creek, gathering
vines and swamp goldenrod to decorate the barn.

By four o'clock in the afternoon buggies and wagons began to arrive at
the big unpainted building in front of Olaf's house. When Nils and his
mother came at five, there were more than fifty people in the barn, and
a great drove of children. On the ground floor stood six long tables,
set with the crockery of seven flourishing Ericson families, lent for
the occasion. In the middle of each table was a big yellow pumpkin,
hollowed out and filled with woodbine. In one corner of the barn, behind
a pile of green-and-white striped watermelons, was a circle of chairs
for the old people; the younger guests sat on bushel measures or
barbed-wire spools, and the children tumbled about in the haymow. The
box stalls Clara had converted into booths. The framework was hidden by
goldenrod and sheaves of wheat, and the partitions were covered 'With
wild grapevines full of fruit. At one of these Johanna Vavrika watched
over her cooked meats, enough to provision an army; and at the next her
kitchen girls had ranged the ice-cream freezers, and Clara was already
cutting pies and cakes against the hour of serving. At the third stall,
little Hilda, in a bright pink lawn dress, dispensed lemonade throughout
the afternoon. Olaf, as a public man, had thought it inadvisable to
serve beer in his barn; but Joe Vavrika had come over with two demijohns
concealed in his buggy, and after his arrival the wagon shed was much
frequented by the men.

“Hasn't Cousin Clara fixed things lovely ?” little Hilda whispered, when
Nils went up to her stall and asked for lemonade.

Nils leaned against the booth, talking to the excited little girl and
watching the people. The barn faced the west, and the sun, pouring in
at the big doors, filled the whole interior with a golden light,
through which filtered fine particles of dust from the haymow, where the
children were romping. There was a great chattering from the stall where
Johanna Vavrika exhibited to the admiring women her platters heaped with
fried chicken, her roasts of beef, boiled tongues, and baked hams
with cloves stuck in the crisp brown fat and garnished with tansy and
parsley. The older women, having assured themselves that there were
twenty kinds of cake, not counting cookies, and three dozen fat pies,
repaired to the corner behind the pile of watermelons, put on their
white aprons, and fell to their knitting and fancywork. They were a fine
company of old women, and a Dutch painter would have loved to find them
there together, where the sun made bright patches on the floor and sent
long, quivering shafts of gold through the dusky shade up among the
rafters. There were fat, rosy old women who looked hot in their best
black dresses; spare, alert old women with brown, dark-veined hands; and
several of almost heroic frame, not less massive than old Mrs. Ericson
herself. Few of them wore glasses, and old Mrs. Svendsen, a Danish
woman, who was quite bald, wore the only cap among them. Mrs. Oleson,
who had twelve big grandchildren, could still show two braids of yellow
hair as thick as her own wrists. Among all these grandmothers there were
more brown heads than white. They all had a pleased, prosperous air, as
if they were more than satisfied with themselves and with life. Nils,
leaning against Hilda's lemonade stand, watched them as they sat
chattering in four languages, their fingers never lagging behind their
tongues.

“Look at them over there,” he whispered, detaining Clara as she passed
him. “Aren't they the Old Guard ? I've just counted thirty hands. I guess
they've wrung many a chicken's neck and warmed many a boy's jacket for
him in their time.”

In reality he fell into amazement when he thought of the Herculean
labours those fifteen pairs of hands had performed: of the cows they
had milked, the butter they had made, the gardens they had planted, the
children and grandchildren they had tended, the brooms they had worn
out, the mountains of food they had cooked. It made him dizzy. Clara
Vavrika smiled a hard, enigmatical smile at him and walked rapidly away.
Nils' eyes followed her white figure as she went toward the house.
He watched her walking alone in the sunlight, looked at her slender,
defiant shoulders and her little hard-set head with its coils of
blue-black hair. “No,” he reflected; “she'd never be like them, not if
she lived here a hundred years. She'd only grow more bitter. You can't
tame a wild thing; you can only chain it. People aren't all alike. I
mustn't lose my nerve.” He gave Hilda's pigtail a parting tweak and
set out after Clara. “Where to ?” he asked, as he came upon her in the
kitchen.

“I'm going to the cellar for preserves.”

“Let me go with you. I never get a moment alone with you. Why do you
keep out of my way ?”

Clara laughed. “I don't usually get in anybody's way.”

Nils followed her down the stairs and to the far corner of the cellar,
where a basement window let in a stream of light. From a swinging shelf
Clara selected several glass jars, each labeled in Johanna's careful
hand. Nils took up a brown flask. “What's this ? It looks good.”

“It is. It's some French brandy father gave me when I was married. Would
you like some ? Have you a corkscrew ? I'll get glasses.”

When she brought them, Nils took them from her and put them down on
the window-sill. “Clara Vavrika, do you remember how crazy I used to be
about you ?”

Clara shrugged her shoulders. “Boys are always crazy about somebody or
another. I dare say some silly has been crazy about Evelina Oleson. You
got over it in a hurry.”

“Because I didn't come back, you mean ? I had to get on, you know, and it
was hard sledding at first. Then I heard you'd married Olaf.”

“And then you stayed away from a broken heart,” Clara laughed.

“And then I began to think about you more than I had since I first went
away. I began to wonder if you were really as you had seemed to me when
I was a boy. I thought I'd like to see. I've had lots of girls, but no
one ever pulled me the same way. The more I thought about you, the
more I remembered how it used to be--like hearing a wild tune you
can't resist, calling you out at night. It had been a long while since
anything had pulled me out of my boots, and I wondered whether anything
ever could again.” Nils thrust his hands into his coat pockets and
squared his shoulders, as his mother sometimes squared hers, as Olaf, in
a clumsier manner, squared his. “So I thought I'd come back and see. Of
course the family have tried to do me, and I rather thought I'd bring
out father's will and make a fuss. But they can have their old land;
they've put enough sweat into it.” He took the flask and filled the
two glasses carefully to the brim. “I've found out what I want from the
Ericsons. Drink _skoal_, Clara.” He lifted his glass, and Clara took
hers with downcast eyes. “Look at me, Clara Vavrika. _Skoal!_”

She raised her burning eyes and answered fiercely: “_Skoal!_”


The barn supper began at six o'clock and lasted for two hilarious
hours. Yense Nelson had made a wager that he could eat two whole fried
chickens, and he did. Eli Swanson stowed away two whole custard pies,
and Nick Hermanson ate a chocolate layer cake to the last crumb. There
was even a cooky contest among the children, and one thin, slablike
Bohemian boy consumed sixteen and won the prize, a gingerbread pig
which Johanna Vavrika had carefully decorated with red candies and burnt
sugar. Fritz Sweiheart, the German carpenter, won in the pickle contest,
but he disappeared soon after supper and was not seen for the rest of
the evening. Joe Vavrika said that Fritz could have managed the pickles
all right, but he had sampled the demijohn in his buggy too often before
sitting down to the table.

While the supper was being cleared away the two fiddlers began to tune
up for the dance. Clara was to accompany them on her old upright piano,
which had been brought down from her father's. By this time Nils had
renewed old acquaintances. Since his interview with Clara in the cellar,
he had been busy telling all the old women how young they looked, and
all the young ones how pretty they were, and assuring the men that
they had here the best farmland in the world. He had made himself so
agreeable that old Mrs. Ericson's friends began to come up to her and
tell how lucky she was to get her smart son back again, and please to
get him to play his flute. Joe Vavrika, who could still play very well
when he forgot that he had rheumatism, caught up a fiddle from Johnny
Oleson and played a crazy Bohemian dance tune that set the wheels going.
When he dropped the bow every one was ready to dance.

Olaf, in a frock coat and a solemn made-up necktie, led the grand march
with his mother. Clara had kept well out of _that_ by sticking to the
piano. She played the march with a pompous solemnity which greatly
amused the prodigal son, who went over and stood behind her.

“Oh, aren't you rubbing it into them, Clara Vavrika ? And aren't you
lucky to have me here, or all your wit would be thrown away.”

“I'm used to being witty for myself. It saves my life.”

The fiddles struck up a polka, and Nils convulsed Joe Vavrika by leading
out Evelina Oleson, the homely schoolteacher. His next partner was a
very fat Swedish girl, who, although she was an heiress, had not been
asked for the first dance, but had stood against the wall in her tight,
high-heeled shoes, nervously fingering a lace handkerchief. She was soon
out of breath, so Nils led her, pleased and panting, to her seat,
and went over to the piano, from which Clara had been watching his
gallantry. “Ask Olena Yenson,” she whispered. “She waltzes beautifully.”

Olena, too, was rather inconveniently plump, handsome in a smooth, heavy
way, with a fine colour and good-natured, sleepy eyes. She was redolent
of violet sachet powder, and had warm, soft, white hands, but she danced
divinely, moving as smoothly as the tide coming in. “There, that's
something like,” Nils said as he released her. “You'll give me the next
waltz, won't you ? Now I must go and dance with my little cousin.”

Hilda was greatly excited when Nils went up to her stall and held out
his arm. Her little eyes sparkled, but she declared that she could not
leave her lemonade. Old Mrs. Ericson, who happened along at this moment,
said she would attend to that, and Hilda came out, as pink as her pink
dress. The dance was a schottische, and in a moment her yellow braids
were fairly standing on end. “Bravo!” Nils cried encouragingly. “Where
did you learn to dance so nicely ?”

“My Cousin Clara taught me,” the little girl panted.

Nils found Eric sitting with a group of boys who were too awkward or too
shy to dance, and told him that he must dance the next waltz with Hilda.

The boy screwed up his shoulders. “Aw, Nils, I can't dance. My feet are
too big; I look silly.”

“Don't be thinking about yourself. It doesn't matter how boys look.”

Nils had never spoken to him so sharply before, and Eric made haste to
scramble out of his corner and brush the straw from his coat.

Clara nodded approvingly. “Good for you, Nils. I've been trying to
get hold of him. They dance very nicely together; I sometimes play for
them.”

“I'm obliged to you for teaching him. There's no reason why he should
grow up to be a lout.”

“He'll never be that. He's more like you than any of them. Only he
hasn't your courage.” From her slanting eyes Clara shot forth one of
those keen glances, admiring and at the same time challenging, which she
seldom bestowed on any one, and which seemed to say, “Yes, I admire you,
but I am your equal.”

Clara was proving a much better host than Olaf, who, once the supper was
over, seemed to feel no interest in anything but the lanterns. He had
brought a locomotive headlight from town to light the revels, and he
kept skulking about as if he feared the mere light from it might set his
new barn on fire. His wife, on the contrary, was cordial to every one,
was animated and even gay. The deep salmon colour in her cheeks burned
vividly, and her eyes were full of life. She gave the piano over to the
fat Swedish heiress, pulled her father away from the corner where he
sat gossiping with his cronies, and made him dance a Bohemian dance with
her. In his youth Joe had been a famous dancer, and his daughter got
him so limbered up that every one sat around and applauded them. The old
ladies were particularly delighted, and made them go through the dance
again. From their corner where they watched and commented, the old women
kept time with their feet and hands, and whenever the fiddles struck up
a new air old Mrs. Svendsen's white cap would begin to bob.

Clara was waltzing with little Eric when Nils came up to them, brushed
his brother aside, and swung her out among the dancers. “Remember how
we used to waltz on rollers at the old skating rink in town ? I suppose
people don't do that any more. We used to keep it up for hours. You
know, we never did moon around as other boys and girls did. It was dead
serious with us from the beginning. When we were most in love with each
other, we used to fight. You were always pinching people; your fingers
were like little nippers. A regular snapping turtle, you were. Lord, how
you'd like Stockholm! Sit out in the streets in front of cafes and talk
all night in summer, just like a reception--officers and ladies and
funny English people. Jolliest people in the world, the Swedes, once you
get them going. Always drinking things--champagne and stout mixed,
half-and-half, serve it out of big pitchers, and serve plenty. Slow
pulse, you know; they can stand a lot. Once they light up, they're
glowworms, I can tell you.”

“All the same, you don't really like gay people.”

“_I_ don't ?”

“No; I could tell that when you were looking at the old women there this
afternoon. They're the kind you really admire, after all; women like
your mother. And that's the kind you'll marry.”

“Is it, Miss Wisdom ? You'll see who I'll marry, and she won't have a
domestic virtue to bless herself with. She'll be a snapping turtle,
and she'll be a match for me. All the same, they're a fine bunch of old
dames over there. You admire them yourself.

“No, I don't; I detest them.”

“You won't, when you look back on them from Stockholm or Budapest.
Freedom settles all that. Oh, but you're the real Bohemian Girl, Clara
Vavrika!” Nils laughed down at her sullen frown and began mockingly to
sing:

       “Oh, how could a poor gypsy maiden like me
       Expect the proud bride of a baron to be ?”

Clara clutched his shoulder. “Hush, Nils; every one is looking at you.”

“I don't care. They can't gossip. It's all in the family, as the
Ericsons say when they divide up little Hilda's patrimony amongst them.
Besides, we'll give them something to talk about when we hit the
trail. Lord, it will be a godsend to them! They haven't had anything so
interesting to chatter about since the grasshopper year. It'll give
them a new lease of life. And Olaf won't lose the Bohemian vote, either.
They'll have the laugh on him so that they'll vote two apiece. They'll
send him to Congress. They'll never forget his barn party, or us.
They'll always remember us as we're dancing together now. We're making
a legend. Where's my waltz, boys ?” he called as they whirled past the
fiddlers.

The musicians grinned, looked at each other, hesitated, and began a new
air; and Nils sang with them, as the couples fell from a quick waltz to
a long, slow glide:

           “When other lips and other hearts
            Their tale of love shall tell,
            In language whose excess imparts
            The power they feel so well.”

The old women applauded vigorously. “What a gay one he is, that Nils!”
 And old Mrs. Svendsen's cap lurched dreamily from side to side to the
flowing measure of the dance.

          “Of days that have as ha-a-p-py been,
          And you'll remember me.”


                          VII

The moonlight flooded that great, silent land. The reaped fields lay
yellow in it. The straw stacks and poplar windbreaks threw sharp black
shadows. The roads were white rivers of dust. The sky was a deep,
crystalline blue, and the stars were few and faint. Everything seemed to
have succumbed, to have sunk to sleep, under the great, golden, tender,
midsummer moon. The splendour of it seemed to transcend human life and
human fate. The senses were too feeble to take it in, and every time one
looked up at the sky one felt unequal to it, as if one were sitting deaf
under the waves of a great river of melody. Near the road, Nils Ericson
was lying against a straw stack in Olaf's wheat field. His own life
seemed strange and unfamiliar to him, as if it were something he had
read about, or dreamed, and forgotten. He lay very still, watching the
white road that ran in front of him, lost itself among the fields, and
then, at a distance, reappeared over a little hill. At last, against
this white band he saw something moving rapidly, and he got up and
walked to the edge of the field. “She is passing the row of poplars
now,” he thought. He heard the padded beat of hoofs along the dusty
road, and as she came into sight he stepped out and waved his arms.
Then, for fear of frightening the horse, he drew back and waited. Clara
had seen him, and she came up at a walk. Nils took the horse by the bit
and stroked his neck.

“What are you doing out so late, Clara Vavrika ? I went to the house, but
Johanna told me you had gone to your father's.”

“Who can stay in the house on a night like this ? Aren't you out
yourself ?”

“Ah, but that's another matter.”

Nils turned the horse into the field.

“What are you doing ? Where are you taking Norman ?”

“Not far, but I want to talk to you tonight; I have something to say to
you. I can't talk to you at the house, with Olaf sitting there on the
porch, weighing a thousand tons.”

Clara laughed. “He won't be sitting there now. He's in bed by this time,
and asleep--weighing a thousand tons.”

Nils plodded on across the stubble. “Are you really going to spend the
rest of your life like this, night after night, summer after summer ?
Haven't you anything better to do on a night like this than to wear
yourself and Norman out tearing across the country to your father's
and back ? Besides, your father won't live forever, you know. His little
place will be shut up or sold, and then you'll have nobody but the
Ericsons. You'll have to fasten down the hatches for the winter then.”

Clara moved her head restlessly. “Don't talk about that. I try never to
think of it. If I lost Father I'd lose everything, even my hold over the
Ericsons.”

“Bah! You'd lose a good deal more than that. You'd lose your race,
everything that makes you yourself. You've lost a good deal of it now.”

“Of what ?”

“Of your love of life, your capacity for delight.”

Clara put her hands up to her face. “I haven't, Nils Ericson, I haven't!
Say anything to me but that. I won't have it!” she declared vehemently.

Nils led the horse up to a straw stack, and turned to Clara, looking
at her intently, as he had looked at her that Sunday afternoon at
Vavrika's. “But why do you fight for that so ? What good is the power
to enjoy, if you never enjoy ? Your hands are cold again; what are you
afraid of all the time ? Ah, you're afraid of losing it; that's what's
the matter with you! And you will, Clara Vavrika, you will! When I used
to know you--listen; you've caught a wild bird in your hand, haven't
you, and felt its heart beat so hard that you were afraid it would
shatter its little body to pieces ? Well, you used to be just like that,
a slender, eager thing with a wild delight inside you. That is how I
remembered you. And I come back and find you--a bitter woman. This is
a perfect ferret fight here; you live by biting and being bitten. Can't
you remember what life used to be ? Can't you remember that old delight ?
I've never forgotten it, or known its like, on land or sea.”

He drew the horse under the shadow of the straw stack. Clara felt him
take her foot out of the stirrup, and she slid softly down into his
arms. He kissed her slowly. He was a deliberate man, but his nerves were
steel when he wanted anything. Something flashed out from him like a
knife out of a sheath. Clara felt everything slipping away from her; she
was flooded by the summer night. He thrust his hand into his pocket,
and then held it out at arm's length. “Look,” he said. The shadow of the
straw stack fell sharp across his wrist, and in the palm of his hand she
saw a silver dollar shining. “That's my pile,” he muttered; “will you go
with me ?”

Clara nodded, and dropped her forehead on his shoulder.

Nils took a deep breath. “Will you go with me tonight ?”

“Where ?” she whispered softly.

“To town, to catch the midnight flyer.”

Clara lifted her head and pulled herself together. “Are you crazy, Nils ?
We couldn't go away like that.”

“That's the only way we ever will go. You can't sit on the bank and
think about it. You have to plunge. That's the way I've always done,
and it's the right way for people like you and me. There's nothing so
dangerous as sitting still. You've only got one life, one youth, and
you can let it slip through your fingers if you want to; nothing easier.
Most people do that. You'd be better off tramping the roads with me than
you are here.” Nils held back her head and looked into her eyes. “But
I'm not that kind of a tramp, Clara. You won't have to take in sewing.
I'm with a Norwegian shipping line; came over on business with the New
York offices, but now I'm going straight back to Bergen. I expect
I've got as much money as the Ericsons. Father sent me a little to get
started. They never knew about that. There, I hadn't meant to tell you;
I wanted you to come on your own nerve.”

Clara looked off across the fields. “It isn't that, Nils, but something
seems to hold me. I'm afraid to pull against it. It comes out of the
ground, I think.”

“I know all about that. One has to tear loose. You're not needed here.
Your father will understand; he's made like us. As for Olaf, Johanna
will take better care of him than ever you could. It's now or never,
Clara Vavrika. My bag's at the station; I smuggled it there yesterday.”

Clara clung to him and hid her face against his shoulder. “Not tonight,”
 she whispered. “Sit here and talk to me tonight. I don't want to go
anywhere tonight. I may never love you like this again.”

Nils laughed through his teeth. “You can't come that on me. That's not
my way, Clara Vavrika. Eric's mare is over there behind the stacks, and
I'm off on the midnight. It's goodbye, or off across the world with me.
My carriage won't wait. I've written a letter to Olaf, I'll mail it
in town. When he reads it he won't bother us--not if I know him. He'd
rather have the land. Besides, I could demand an investigation of his
administration of Cousin Henrik's estate, and that would be bad for a
public man. You've no clothes, I know; but you can sit up tonight, and
we can get everything on the way. Where's your old dash, Clara Vavrika ?
What's become of your Bohemian blood ? I used to think you had courage
enough for anything. Where's your nerve--what are you waiting for ?”

Clara drew back her head, and he saw the slumberous fire in her eyes.
“For you to say one thing, Nils Ericson.”

“I never say that thing to any woman, Clara Vavrika.” He leaned back,
lifted her gently from the ground, and whispered through his teeth: “But
I'll never, never let you go, not to any man on earth but me! Do you
understand me ? Now, wait here.”

Clara sank down on a sheaf of wheat and covered her face with her hands.
She did not know what she was going to do--whether she would go or stay.
The great, silent country seemed to lay a spell upon her. The ground
seemed to hold her as if by roots. Her knees were soft under her. She
felt as if she could not bear separation from her old sorrows, from her
old discontent. They were dear to her, they had kept her alive, they
were a part of her. There would be nothing left of her if she were
wrenched away from them. Never could she pass beyond that skyline
against which her restlessness had beat so many times. She felt as if
her soul had built itself a nest there on that horizon at which
she looked every morning and every evening, and it was dear to her,
inexpressibly dear. She pressed her fingers against her eyeballs to shut
it out. Beside her she heard the tramping of horses in the soft earth.
Nils said nothing to her. He put his hands under her arms and lifted her
lightly to her saddle. Then he swung himself into his own.

“We shall have to ride fast to catch the midnight train. A last gallop,
Clara Vavrika. Forward!”

There was a start, a thud of hoofs along the moonlit road, two dark
shadows going over the hill; and then the great, still land stretched
untroubled under the azure night. Two shadows had passed.


                          VII

A year after the flight of Olaf Ericson's wife, the night train was
steaming across the plains of Iowa. The conductor was hurrying through
one of the day coaches, his lantern on his arm, when a lank, fair-haired
boy sat up in one of the plush seats and tweaked him by the coat.

“What is the next stop, please, sir ?”

“Red Oak, Iowa. But you go through to Chicago, don't you ?” He looked
down, and noticed that the boy's eyes were red and his face was drawn,
as if he were in trouble.

“Yes. But I was wondering whether I could get off at the next place and
get a train back to Omaha.”

“Well, I suppose you could. Live in Omaha ?”

“No. In the western part of the State. How soon do we get to Red Oak ?”

“Forty minutes. You'd better make up your mind, so I can tell the
baggageman to put your trunk off.”

“Oh, never mind about that! I mean, I haven't got any,” the boy added,
blushing.

“Run away,” the conductor thought, as he slammed the coach door behind
him.

Eric Ericson crumpled down in his seat and put his brown hand to his
forehead. He had been crying, and he had had no supper, and his head was
aching violently. “Oh, what shall I do ?” he thought, as he looked dully
down at his big shoes. “Nils will be ashamed of me; I haven't got any
spunk.”

Ever since Nils had run away with his brother's wife, life at home had
been hard for little Eric. His mother and Olaf both suspected him of
complicity. Mrs. Ericson was harsh and faultfinding, constantly wounding
the boy's pride; and Olaf was always setting her against him.

Joe Vavrika heard often from his daughter. Clara had always been fond of
her father, and happiness made her kinder. She wrote him long accounts
of the voyage to Bergen, and of the trip she and Nils took through
Bohemia to the little town where her father had grown up and where she
herself was born. She visited all her kinsmen there, and sent her father
news of his brother, who was a priest; of his sister, who had married a
horse-breeder--of their big farm and their many children. These letters
Joe always managed to read to little Eric. They contained messages for
Eric and Hilda. Clara sent presents, too, which Eric never dared to take
home and which poor little Hilda never even saw, though she loved to
hear Eric tell about them when they were out getting the eggs together.
But Olaf once saw Eric coming out of Vavrika's house--the old man had
never asked the boy to come into his saloon--and Olaf went straight to
his mother and told her. That night Mrs. Ericson came to Eric's room
after he was in bed and made a terrible scene. She could be very
terrifying when she was really angry. She forbade him ever to speak to
Vavrika again, and after that night she would not allow him to go to
town alone. So it was a long while before Eric got any more news of his
brother. But old Joe suspected what was going on, and he carried Clara's
letters about in his pocket. One Sunday he drove out to see a German
friend of his, and chanced to catch sight of Eric, sitting by the cattle
pond in the big pasture. They went together into Fritz Oberlies' barn,
and read the letters and talked things over. Eric admitted that things
were getting hard for him at home. That very night old Joe sat down and
laboriously penned a statement of the case to his daughter.

Things got no better for Eric. His mother and Olaf felt that, however
closely he was watched, he still, as they said, “heard.” Mrs. Ericson
could not admit neutrality. She had sent Johanna Vavrika packing back to
her brother's, though Olaf would much rather have kept her than Anders'
eldest daughter, whom Mrs. Ericson installed in her place. He was not
so highhanded as his mother, and he once sulkily told her that she might
better have taught her granddaughter to cook before she sent Johanna
away. Olaf could have borne a good deal for the sake of prunes spiced in
honey, the secret of which Johanna had taken away with her.

At last two letters came to Joe Vavrika: one from Nils, enclosing a
postal order for money to pay Eric's passage to Bergen, and one from
Clara, saying that Nils had a place for Eric in the offices of his
company, that he was to live with them, and that they were only waiting
for him to come. He was to leave New York on one of the boats of Nils'
own line; the captain was one of their friends, and Eric was to make
himself known at once.

Nils' directions were so explicit that a baby could have followed them,
Eric felt. And here he was, nearing Red Oak, Iowa, and rocking backward
and forward in despair. Never had he loved his brother so much, and
never had the big world called to him so hard. But there was a lump in
his throat which would not go down. Ever since nightfall he had been
tormented by the thought of his mother, alone in that big house that
had sent forth so many men. Her unkindness now seemed so little, and her
loneliness so great. He remembered everything she had ever done for him:
how frightened she had been when he tore his hand in the corn-sheller,
and how she wouldn't let Olaf scold him. When Nils went away he didn't
leave his mother all alone, or he would never have gone. Eric felt sure
of that.

The train whistled. The conductor came in, smiling not unkindly.
“Well, young man, what are you going to do ? We stop at Red Oak in three
minutes.”

“Yes, thank you. I'll let you know.” The conductor went out, and the boy
doubled up with misery. He couldn't let his one chance go like this.
He felt for his breast pocket and crackled Nils' letter to give him
courage. He didn't want Nils to be ashamed of him. The train stopped.
Suddenly he remembered his brother's kind, twinkling eyes, that always
looked at you as if from far away. The lump in his throat softened. “Ah,
but Nils, Nils would _understand_!” he thought. “That's just it about
Nils; he always understands.”

A lank, pale boy with a canvas telescope stumbled off the train to the
Red Oak siding, just as the conductor called, “All aboard!”

The next night Mrs. Ericson was sitting alone in her wooden
rocking-chair on the front porch. Little Hilda had been sent to bed and
had cried herself to sleep. The old woman's knitting was on her lap, but
her hands lay motionless on top of it. For more than an hour she had not
moved a muscle. She simply sat, as only the Ericsons and the mountains
can sit. The house was dark, and there was no sound but the croaking of
the frogs down in the pond of the little pasture.

Eric did not come home by the road, but across the fields, where no one
could see him. He set his telescope down softly in the kitchen shed, and
slipped noiselessly along the path to the front porch. He sat down on
the step without saying anything. Mrs. Ericson made no sign, and the
frogs croaked on. At last the boy spoke timidly.

“I've come back, Mother.”

“Very well,” said Mrs. Ericson.

Eric leaned over and picked up a little stick out of the grass.

“How about the milking ?” he faltered.

“That's been done, hours ago.”

“Who did you get ?”

“Get ? I did it myself. I can milk as good as any of you.”

Eric slid along the step nearer to her. “Oh, Mother, why did you ?” he
asked sorrowfully. “Why didn't you get one of Otto's boys ?”

“I didn't want anybody to know I was in need of a boy,” said Mrs.
Ericson bitterly. She looked straight in front of her and her mouth
tightened. “I always meant to give you the home farm,” she added.

The boy stared and slid closer. “Oh, Mother,” he faltered, “I don't care
about the farm. I came back because I thought you might be needing me,
maybe.” He hung his head and got no further.

“Very well,” said Mrs. Ericson. Her hand went out from her suddenly
and rested on his head. Her fingers twined themselves in his soft, pale
hair. His tears splashed down on the boards; happiness filled his heart.




THE TROLL GARDEN




Flavia and Her Artists

As the train neared Tarrytown, Imogen Willard began to wonder why she
had consented to be one of Flavia's house party at all. She had not felt
enthusiastic about it since leaving the city, and was experiencing a
prolonged ebb of purpose, a current of chilling indecision, under
which she vainly sought for the motive which had induced her to accept
Flavia's invitation.

Perhaps it was a vague curiosity to see Flavia's husband, who had been
the magician of her childhood and the hero of innumerable Arabian fairy
tales. Perhaps it was a desire to see M. Roux, whom Flavia had announced
as the especial attraction of the occasion. Perhaps it was a wish to
study that remarkable woman in her own setting.

Imogen admitted a mild curiosity concerning Flavia. She was in the habit
of taking people rather seriously, but somehow found it impossible to
take Flavia so, because of the very vehemence and insistence with which
Flavia demanded it. Submerged in her studies, Imogen had, of late years,
seen very little of Flavia; but Flavia, in her hurried visits to New
York, between her excursions from studio to studio--her luncheons with
this lady who had to play at a matinee, and her dinners with that singer
who had an evening concert--had seen enough of her friend's handsome
daughter to conceive for her an inclination of such violence and
assurance as only Flavia could afford. The fact that Imogen had shown
rather marked capacity in certain esoteric lines of scholarship, and
had decided to specialize in a well-sounding branch of philology at
the Ecole des Chartes, had fairly placed her in that category of
“interesting people” whom Flavia considered her natural affinities, and
lawful prey.

When Imogen stepped upon the station platform she was immediately
appropriated by her hostess, whose commanding figure and assurance of
attire she had recognized from a distance. She was hurried into a high
tilbury and Flavia, taking the driver's cushion beside her, gathered up
the reins with an experienced hand.

“My dear girl,” she remarked, as she turned the horses up the street, “I
was afraid the train might be late. M. Roux insisted upon coming up by
boat and did not arrive until after seven.”

“To think of M. Roux's being in this part of the world at all, and
subject to the vicissitudes of river boats! Why in the world did he come
over ?” queried Imogen with lively interest. “He is the sort of man who
must dissolve and become a shadow outside of Paris.”

“Oh, we have a houseful of the most interesting people,” said Flavia,
professionally. “We have actually managed to get Ivan Schemetzkin. He
was ill in California at the close of his concert tour, you know, and he
is recuperating with us, after his wearing journey from the coast. Then
there is Jules Martel, the painter; Signor Donati, the tenor; Professor
Schotte, who has dug up Assyria, you know; Restzhoff, the Russian
chemist; Alcee Buisson, the philologist; Frank Wellington, the novelist;
and Will Maidenwood, the editor of _Woman_. Then there is my second
cousin, Jemima Broadwood, who made such a hit in Pinero's comedy last
winter, and Frau Lichtenfeld. _Have_ you read her ?”

Imogen confessed her utter ignorance of Frau Lichtenfeld, and Flavia
went on.

“Well, she is a most remarkable person; one of those advanced German
women, a militant iconoclast, and this drive will not be long enough to
permit of my telling you her history. Such a story! Her novels were the
talk of all Germany when I was there last, and several of them have been
suppressed--an honor in Germany, I understand. 'At Whose Door' has been
translated. I am so unfortunate as not to read German.”

“I'm all excitement at the prospect of meeting Miss Broadwood,”
 said Imogen. “I've seen her in nearly everything she does. Her stage
personality is delightful. She always reminds me of a nice, clean,
pink-and-white boy who has just had his cold bath, and come down all
aglow for a run before breakfast.”

“Yes, but isn't it unfortunate that she will limit herself to those
minor comedy parts that are so little appreciated in this country ? One
ought to be satisfied with nothing less than the best, ought one ?” The
peculiar, breathy tone in which Flavia always uttered that word “best,”
 the most worn in her vocabulary, always jarred on Imogen and always made
her obdurate.

“I don't at all agree with you,” she said reservedly. “I thought
everyone admitted that the most remarkable thing about Miss Broadwood is
her admirable sense of fitness, which is rare enough in her profession.”

Flavia could not endure being contradicted; she always seemed to regard
it in the light of a defeat, and usually colored unbecomingly. Now she
changed the subject.

“Look, my dear,” she cried, “there is Frau Lichtenfeld now, coming to
meet us. Doesn't she look as if she had just escaped out of Valhalla ?
She is actually over six feet.”

Imogen saw a woman of immense stature, in a very short skirt and a
broad, flapping sun hat, striding down the hillside at a long, swinging
gait. The refugee from Valhalla approached, panting. Her heavy, Teutonic
features were scarlet from the rigor of her exercise, and her hair,
under her flapping sun hat, was tightly befrizzled about her brow. She
fixed her sharp little eyes upon Imogen and extended both her hands.

“So this is the little friend ?” she cried, in a rolling baritone.

Imogen was quite as tall as her hostess; but everything, she reflected,
is comparative. After the introduction Flavia apologized.

“I wish I could ask you to drive up with us, Frau Lichtenfeld.”

“Ah, no!” cried the giantess, drooping her head in humorous caricature
of a time-honored pose of the heroines of sentimental romances. “It has
never been my fate to be fitted into corners. I have never known the
sweet privileges of the tiny.”

Laughing, Flavia started the ponies, and the colossal woman, standing
in the middle of the dusty road, took off her wide hat and waved them
a farewell which, in scope of gesture, recalled the salute of a plumed
cavalier.

When they arrived at the house, Imogen looked about her with keen
curiosity, for this was veritably the work of Flavia's hands, the
materialization of hopes long deferred. They passed directly into a
large, square hall with a gallery on three sides, studio fashion. This
opened at one end into a Dutch breakfast room, beyond which was the
large dining room. At the other end of the hall was the music room.
There was a smoking room, which one entered through the library
behind the staircase. On the second floor there was the same general
arrangement: a square hall, and, opening from it, the guest chambers,
or, as Miss Broadwood termed them, the “cages.”

When Imogen went to her room, the guests had begun to return from their
various afternoon excursions. Boys were gliding through the halls with
ice water, covered trays, and flowers, colliding with maids and valets
who carried shoes and other articles of wearing apparel. Yet, all this
was done in response to inaudible bells, on felt soles, and in hushed
voices, so that there was very little confusion about it.

Flavia had at last built her house and hewn out her seven pillars; there
could be no doubt, now, that the asylum for talent, the sanatorium of
the arts, so long projected, was an accomplished fact. Her ambition
had long ago outgrown the dimensions of her house on Prairie Avenue;
besides, she had bitterly complained that in Chicago traditions were
against her. Her project had been delayed by Arthur's doggedly standing
out for the Michigan woods, but Flavia knew well enough that certain of
the _rarae aves_--“the best”--could not be lured so far away from the
seaport, so she declared herself for the historic Hudson and knew no
retreat. The establishing of a New York office had at length overthrown
Arthur's last valid objection to quitting the lake country for three
months of the year; and Arthur could be wearied into anything, as those
who knew him knew.

Flavia's house was the mirror of her exultation; it was a temple to the
gods of Victory, a sort of triumphal arch. In her earlier days she had
swallowed experiences that would have unmanned one of less torrential
enthusiasm or blind pertinacity. But, of late years, her determination
had told; she saw less and less of those mysterious persons with
mysterious obstacles in their path and mysterious grievances against the
world, who had once frequented her house on Prairie Avenue. In the stead
of this multitude of the unarrived, she had now the few, the select,
“the best.” Of all that band of indigent retainers who had once fed at
her board like the suitors in the halls of Penelope, only Alcee Buisson
still retained his right of entree. He alone had remembered that
ambition hath a knapsack at his back, wherein he puts alms to oblivion,
and he alone had been considerate enough to do what Flavia had expected
of him, and give his name a current value in the world. Then, as
Miss Broadwood put it, “he was her first real one,”--and Flavia, like
Mohammed, could remember her first believer.

“The House of Song,” as Miss Broadwood had called it, was the outcome
of Flavia's more exalted strategies. A woman who made less a point of
sympathizing with their delicate organisms, might have sought to plunge
these phosphorescent pieces into the tepid bath of domestic life;
but Flavia's discernment was deeper. This must be a refuge where the
shrinking soul, the sensitive brain, should be unconstrained; where
the caprice of fancy should outweigh the civil code, if necessary. She
considered that this much Arthur owed her; for she, in her turn, had
made concessions. Flavia had, indeed, quite an equipment of epigrams
to the effect that our century creates the iron genii which evolve its
fairy tales: but the fact that her husband's name was annually painted
upon some ten thousand threshing machines in reality contributed very
little to her happiness.

Arthur Hamilton was born and had spent his boyhood in the West Indies,
and physically he had never lost the brand of the tropics. His father,
after inventing the machine which bore his name, had returned to the
States to patent and manufacture it. After leaving college, Arthur had
spent five years ranching in the West and traveling abroad. Upon his
father's death he had returned to Chicago and, to the astonishment of
all his friends, had taken up the business--without any demonstration
of enthusiasm, but with quiet perseverance, marked ability, and amazing
industry. Why or how a self-sufficient, rather ascetic man of thirty,
indifferent in manner, wholly negative in all other personal relations,
should have doggedly wooed and finally married Flavia Malcolm was a
problem that had vexed older heads than Imogen's.

While Imogen was dressing she heard a knock at her door, and a young
woman entered whom she at once recognized as Jemima Broadwood--“Jimmy”
 Broadwood she was called by people in her own profession. While there
was something unmistakably professional in her frank _savoir-faire_,
“Jimmy's” was one of those faces to which the rouge never seems to
stick. Her eyes were keen and gray as a windy April sky, and so far from
having been seared by calcium lights, you might have fancied they had
never looked on anything less bucolic than growing fields and country
fairs. She wore her thick, brown hair short and parted at the side; and,
rather than hinting at freakishness, this seemed admirably in keeping
with her fresh, boyish countenance. She extended to Imogen a large,
well-shaped hand which it was a pleasure to clasp.

“Ah! You are Miss Willard, and I see I need not introduce myself. Flavia
said you were kind enough to express a wish to meet me, and I preferred
to meet you alone. Do you mind if I smoke ?”

“Why, certainly not,” said Imogen, somewhat disconcerted and looking
hurriedly about for matches.

“There, be calm, I'm always prepared,” said Miss Broadwood, checking
Imogen's flurry with a soothing gesture, and producing an oddly
fashioned silver match-case from some mysterious recess in her dinner
gown. She sat down in a deep chair, crossed her patent-leather Oxfords,
and lit her cigarette. “This matchbox,” she went on meditatively, “once
belonged to a Prussian officer. He shot himself in his bathtub, and I
bought it at the sale of his effects.”

Imogen had not yet found any suitable reply to make to this rather
irrelevant confidence, when Miss Broadwood turned to her cordially: “I'm
awfully glad you've come, Miss Willard, though I've not quite decided
why you did it. I wanted very much to meet you. Flavia gave me your
thesis to read.”

“Why, how funny!” ejaculated Imogen.

“On the contrary,” remarked Miss Broadwood. “I thought it decidedly
lacked humor.”

“I meant,” stammered Imogen, beginning to feel very much like Alice
in Wonderland, “I meant that I thought it rather strange Mrs. Hamilton
should fancy you would be interested.”

Miss Broadwood laughed heartily. “Now, don't let my rudeness frighten
you. Really, I found it very interesting, and no end impressive. You
see, most people in my profession are good for absolutely nothing else,
and, therefore, they have a deep and abiding conviction that in some
other line they might have shone. Strange to say, scholarship is the
object of our envious and particular admiration. Anything in type
impresses us greatly; that's why so many of us marry authors or
newspapermen and lead miserable lives.” Miss Broadwood saw that she had
rather disconcerted Imogen, and blithely tacked in another direction.
“You see,” she went on, tossing aside her half-consumed cigarette, “some
years ago Flavia would not have deemed me worthy to open the pages of
your thesis--nor to be one of her house party of the chosen, for that
matter. I've Pinero to thank for both pleasures. It all depends on the
class of business I'm playing whether I'm in favor or not. Flavia is
my second cousin, you know, so I can say whatever disagreeable things I
choose with perfect good grace. I'm quite desperate for someone to laugh
with, so I'm going to fasten myself upon you--for, of course, one can't
expect any of these gypsy-dago people to see anything funny. I don't
intend you shall lose the humor of the situation. What do you think of
Flavia's infirmary for the arts, anyway ?”

“Well, it's rather too soon for me to have any opinion at all,” said
Imogen, as she again turned to her dressing. “So far, you are the only
one of the artists I've met.”

“One of them ?” echoed Miss Broadwood. “One of the _artists_ ? My offense
may be rank, my dear, but I really don't deserve that. Come, now,
whatever badges of my tribe I may bear upon me, just let me divest you
of any notion that I take myself seriously.”

Imogen turned from the mirror in blank astonishment and sat down on the
arm of a chair, facing her visitor. “I can't fathom you at all,
Miss Broadwood,” she said frankly. “Why shouldn't you take yourself
seriously ? What's the use of beating about the bush ? Surely you know
that you are one of the few players on this side of the water who have
at all the spirit of natural or ingenuous comedy ?”

“Thank you, my dear. Now we are quite even about the thesis, aren't
we ? Oh, did you mean it ? Well, you _are_ a clever girl. But you see it
doesn't do to permit oneself to look at it in that light. If we do, we
always go to pieces and waste our substance astarring as the unhappy
daughter of the Capulets. But there, I hear Flavia coming to take you
down; and just remember I'm not one of them--the artists, I mean.”


Flavia conducted Imogen and Miss Broadwood downstairs. As they reached
the lower hall they heard voices from the music room, and dim figures
were lurking in the shadows under the gallery, but their hostess led
straight to the smoking room. The June evening was chilly, and a fire
had been lighted in the fireplace. Through the deepening dusk, the
firelight flickered upon the pipes and curious weapons on the wall and
threw an orange glow over the Turkish hangings. One side of the smoking
room was entirely of glass, separating it from the conservatory, which
was flooded with white light from the electric bulbs. There was about
the darkened room some suggestion of certain chambers in the Arabian
Nights, opening on a court of palms. Perhaps it was partially this
memory-evoking suggestion that caused Imogen to start so violently when
she saw dimly, in a blur of shadow, the figure of a man, who sat smoking
in a low, deep chair before the fire. He was long, and thin, and brown.
His long, nerveless hands drooped from the arms of his chair. A brown
mustache shaded his mouth, and his eyes were sleepy and apathetic. When
Imogen entered he rose indolently and gave her his hand, his manner
barely courteous.

“I am glad you arrived promptly, Miss Willard,” he said with an
indifferent drawl. “Flavia was afraid you might be late. You had a
pleasant ride up, I hope ?”

“Oh, very, thank you, Mr. Hamilton,” she replied, feeling that he did
not particularly care whether she replied at all.

Flavia explained that she had not yet had time to dress for dinner,
as she had been attending to Mr. Will Maidenwood, who had become faint
after hurting his finger in an obdurate window, and immediately excused
herself As she left, Hamilton turned to Miss Broadwood with a rather
spiritless smile.

“Well, Jimmy,” he remarked, “I brought up a piano box full of fireworks
for the boys. How do you suppose we'll manage to keep them until the
Fourth ?”

“We can't, unless we steel ourselves to deny there are any on the
premises,” said Miss Broadwood, seating herself on a low stool by
Hamilton's chair and leaning back against the mantel. “Have you seen
Helen, and has she told you the tragedy of the tooth ?”

“She met me at the station, with her tooth wrapped up in tissue paper.
I had tea with her an hour ago. Better sit down, Miss Willard;” he rose
and pushed a chair toward Imogen, who was standing peering into the
conservatory. “We are scheduled to dine at seven, but they seldom get
around before eight.”

By this time Imogen had made out that here the plural pronoun, third
person, always referred to the artists. As Hamilton's manner did not
spur one to cordial intercourse, and as his attention seemed directed
to Miss Broadwood, insofar as it could be said to be directed to anyone,
she sat down facing the conservatory and watched him, unable to decide
in how far he was identical with the man who had first met Flavia
Malcolm in her mother's house, twelve years ago. Did he at all remember
having known her as a little girl, and why did his indifference hurt her
so, after all these years ? Had some remnant of her childish affection
for him gone on living, somewhere down in the sealed caves of her
consciousness, and had she really expected to find it possible to be
fond of him again ? Suddenly she saw a light in the man's sleepy eyes,
an unmistakable expression of interest and pleasure that fairly startled
her. She turned quickly in the direction of his glance, and saw Flavia,
just entering, dressed for dinner and lit by the effulgence of her most
radiant manner. Most people considered Flavia handsome, and there was
no gainsaying that she carried her five-and-thirty years splendidly. Her
figure had never grown matronly, and her face was of the sort that does
not show wear. Its blond tints were as fresh and enduring as enamel--and
quite as hard. Its usual expression was one of tense, often strained,
animation, which compressed her lips nervously. A perfect scream of
animation, Miss Broadwood had called it, created and maintained by
sheer, indomitable force of will. Flavia's appearance on any scene
whatever made a ripple, caused a certain agitation and recognition, and,
among impressionable people, a certain uneasiness, For all her sparkling
assurance of manner, Flavia was certainly always ill at ease and, even
more certainly, anxious. She seemed not convinced of the established
order of material things, seemed always trying to conceal her feeling
that walls might crumble, chasms open, or the fabric of her life fly
to the winds in irretrievable entanglement. At least this was the
impression Imogen got from that note in Flavia which was so manifestly
false.

Hamilton's keen, quick, satisfied glance at his wife had recalled to
Imogen all her inventory of speculations about them. She looked at him
with compassionate surprise. As a child she had never permitted herself
to believe that Hamilton cared at all for the woman who had taken him
away from her; and since she had begun to think about them again, it
had never occurred to her that anyone could become attached to Flavia in
that deeply personal and exclusive sense. It seemed quite as irrational
as trying to possess oneself of Broadway at noon.

When they went out to dinner Imogen realized the completeness of
Flavia's triumph. They were people of one name, mostly, like kings;
people whose names stirred the imagination like a romance or a melody.
With the notable exception of M. Roux, Imogen had seen most of them
before, either in concert halls or lecture rooms; but they looked
noticeably older and dimmer than she remembered them.

Opposite her sat Schemetzkin, the Russian pianist, a short, corpulent
man, with an apoplectic face and purplish skin, his thick, iron-gray
hair tossed back from his forehead. Next to the German giantess sat the
Italian tenor--the tiniest of men--pale, with soft, light hair, much
in disorder, very red lips, and fingers yellowed by cigarettes. Frau
Lichtenfeld shone in a gown of emerald green, fitting so closely as to
enhance her natural floridness. However, to do the good lady justice,
let her attire be never so modest, it gave an effect of barbaric
splendor. At her left sat Herr Schotte, the Assyriologist, whose
features were effectually concealed by the convergence of his hair and
beard, and whose glasses were continually falling into his plate.
This gentleman had removed more tons of earth in the course of his
explorations than had any of his confreres, and his vigorous attack upon
his food seemed to suggest the strenuous nature of his accustomed toil.
His eyes were small and deeply set, and his forehead bulged fiercely
above his eyes in a bony ridge. His heavy brows completed the leonine
suggestion of his face. Even to Imogen, who knew something of his work
and greatly respected it, he was entirely too reminiscent of the Stone
Age to be altogether an agreeable dinner companion. He seemed, indeed,
to have absorbed something of the savagery of those early types of life
which he continually studied.

Frank Wellington, the young Kansas man who had been two years out of
Harvard and had published three historical novels, sat next to Mr. Will
Maidenwood, who was still pale from his recent sufferings and carried
his hand bandaged. They took little part in the general conversation,
but, like the lion and the unicorn, were always at it, discussing,
every time they met, whether there were or were not passages in Mr.
Wellington's works which should be eliminated, out of consideration
for the Young Person. Wellington had fallen into the hands of a great
American syndicate which most effectually befriended struggling authors
whose struggles were in the right direction, and which had guaranteed
to make him famous before he was thirty. Feeling the security of his
position he stoutly defended those passages which jarred upon the
sensitive nerves of the young editor of _Woman_. Maidenwood, in the
smoothest of voices, urged the necessity of the author's recognizing
certain restrictions at the outset, and Miss Broadwood, who joined the
argument quite without invitation or encouragement, seconded him with
pointed and malicious remarks which caused the young editor manifest
discomfort. Restzhoff, the chemist, demanded the attention of the entire
company for his exposition of his devices for manufacturing ice cream
from vegetable oils and for administering drugs in bonbons.

Flavia, always noticeably restless at dinner, was somewhat apathetic
toward the advocate of peptonized chocolate and was plainly concerned
about the sudden departure of M. Roux, who had announced that it would
be necessary for him to leave tomorrow. M. Emile Roux, who sat at
Flavia's right, was a man in middle life and quite bald, clearly without
personal vanity, though his publishers preferred to circulate only those
of his portraits taken in his ambrosial youth. Imogen was considerably
shocked at his unlikeness to the slender, black-stocked Rolla he had
looked at twenty. He had declined into the florid, settled heaviness of
indifference and approaching age. There was, however, a certain look of
durability and solidity about him; the look of a man who has earned the
right to be fat and bald, and even silent at dinner if he chooses.

Throughout the discussion between Wellington and Will Maidenwood, though
they invited his participation, he remained silent, betraying no sign
either of interest or contempt. Since his arrival he had directed most
of his conversation to Hamilton, who had never read one of his twelve
great novels. This perplexed and troubled Flavia. On the night of his
arrival Jules Martel had enthusiastically declared, “There are schools
and schools, manners and manners; but Roux is Roux, and Paris sets
its watches by his clock.” Flavia had already repeated this remark to
Imogen. It haunted her, and each time she quoted it she was impressed
anew.

Flavia shifted the conversation uneasily, evidently exasperated and
excited by her repeated failures to draw the novelist out. “Monsieur
Roux,” she began abruptly, with her most animated smile, “I remember so
well a statement I read some years ago in your 'Mes Etudes des Femmes'
to the effect that you had never met a really intellectual woman. May I
ask, without being impertinent, whether that assertion still represents
your experience ?”

“I meant, madam,” said the novelist conservatively, “intellectual in
a sense very special, as we say of men in whom the purely intellectual
functions seem almost independent.”

“And you still think a woman so constituted a mythical personage ?”
 persisted Flavia, nodding her head encouragingly.

“_Une Meduse_, madam, who, if she were discovered, would transmute us
all into stone,” said the novelist, bowing gravely. “If she existed at
all,” he added deliberately, “it was my business to find her, and
she has cost me many a vain pilgrimage. Like Rudel of Tripoli, I have
crossed seas and penetrated deserts to seek her out. I have, indeed,
encountered women of learning whose industry I have been compelled
to respect; many who have possessed beauty and charm and perplexing
cleverness; a few with remarkable information and a sort of fatal
facility.”

“And Mrs. Browning, George Eliot, and your own Mme. Dudevant ?” queried
Flavia with that fervid enthusiasm with which she could, on occasion,
utter things simply incomprehensible for their banality--at her feats of
this sort Miss Broadwood was wont to sit breathless with admiration.

“Madam, while the intellect was undeniably present in the performances
of those women, it was only the stick of the rocket. Although this
woman has eluded me I have studied her conditions and perturbances as
astronomers conjecture the orbits of planets they have never seen.
if she exists, she is probably neither an artist nor a woman with a
mission, but an obscure personage, with imperative intellectual needs,
who absorbs rather than produces.”

Flavia, still nodding nervously, fixed a strained glance of
interrogation upon M. Roux. “Then you think she would be a woman whose
first necessity would be to know, whose instincts would be satisfied
only with the best, who could draw from others; appreciative, merely ?”

The novelist lifted his dull eyes to his interlocutress with an
untranslatable smile and a slight inclination of his shoulders. “Exactly
so; you are really remarkable, madam,” he added, in a tone of cold
astonishment.

After dinner the guests took their coffee in the music room, where
Schemetzkin sat down at the piano to drum ragtime, and give his
celebrated imitation of the boardingschool girl's execution of Chopin.
He flatly refused to play anything more serious, and would practice only
in the morning, when he had the music room to himself. Hamilton and M.
Roux repaired to the smoking room to discuss the necessity of extending
the tax on manufactured articles in France--one of those conversations
which particularly exasperated Flavia.

After Schemetzkin had grimaced and tortured the keyboard with malicious
vulgarities for half an hour, Signor Donati, to put an end to his
torture, consented to sing, and Flavia and Imogen went to fetch Arthur
to play his accompaniments. Hamilton rose with an annoyed look and
placed his cigarette on the mantel. “Why yes, Flavia, I'll accompany
him, provided he sings something with a melody, Italian arias or
ballads, and provided the recital is not interminable.”

“You will join us, M. Roux ?”

“Thank you, but I have some letters to write,” replied the novelist,
bowing.

As Flavia had remarked to Imogen, “Arthur really played accompaniments
remarkably well.” To hear him recalled vividly the days of her
childhood, when he always used to spend his business vacations at her
mother's home in Maine. He had possessed for her that almost hypnotic
influence which young men sometimes exert upon little girls. It was a
sort of phantom love affair, subjective and fanciful, a precocity of
instinct, like that tender and maternal concern which some little girls
feel for their dolls. Yet this childish infatuation is capable of
all the depressions and exaltations of love itself, it has its bitter
jealousies, cruel disappointments, its exacting caprices.

Summer after summer she had awaited his coming and wept at his
departure, indifferent to the gayer young men who had called her their
sweetheart and laughed at everything she said. Although Hamilton never
said so, she had been always quite sure that he was fond of her. When
he pulled her up the river to hunt for fairy knolls shut about by low,
hanging willows, he was often silent for an hour at a time, yet she
never felt he was bored or was neglecting her. He would lie in the sand
smoking, his eyes half-closed, watching her play, and she was always
conscious that she was entertaining him. Sometimes he would take a copy
of “Alice in Wonderland” in his pocket, and no one could read it as he
could, laughing at her with his dark eyes, when anything amused him.
No one else could laugh so, with just their eyes, and without moving a
muscle of their face. Though he usually smiled at passages that seemed
not at all funny to the child, she always laughed gleefully, because he
was so seldom moved to mirth that any such demonstration delighted her
and she took the credit of it entirely to herself Her own inclination
had been for serious stories, with sad endings, like the Little Mermaid,
which he had once told her in an unguarded moment when she had a cold,
and was put to bed early on her birthday night and cried because she
could not have her party. But he highly disapproved of this preference,
and had called it a morbid taste, and always shook his finger at her
when she asked for the story. When she had been particularly good, or
particularly neglected by other people, then he would sometimes melt
and tell her the story, and never laugh at her if she enjoyed the “sad
ending” even to tears. When Flavia had taken him away and he came no
more, she wept inconsolably for the space of two weeks, and refused
to learn her lessons. Then she found the story of the Little Mermaid
herself, and forgot him.

Imogen had discovered at dinner that he could still smile at one
secretly, out of his eyes, and that he had the old manner of outwardly
seeming bored, but letting you know that he was not. She was intensely
curious about his exact state of feeling toward his wife, and more
curious still to catch a sense of his final adjustment to the conditions
of life in general. This, she could not help feeling, she might get
again--if she could have him alone for an hour, in some place where
there was a little river and a sandy cove bordered by drooping willows,
and a blue sky seen through white sycamore boughs.

That evening, before retiring, Flavia entered her husband's room, where
he sat in his smoking jacket, in one of his favorite low chairs.

“I suppose it's a grave responsibility to bring an ardent, serious young
thing like Imogen here among all these fascinating personages,” she
remarked reflectively. “But, after all, one can never tell. These grave,
silent girls have their own charm, even for facile people.”

“Oh, so that is your plan ?” queried her husband dryly. “I was wondering
why you got her up here. She doesn't seem to mix well with the faciles.
At least, so it struck me.”

Flavia paid no heed to this jeering remark, but repeated, “No, after
all, it may not be a bad thing.”

“Then do consign her to that shaken reed, the tenor,” said her husband
yawning. “I remember she used to have a taste for the pathetic.”

“And then,” remarked Flavia coquettishly, “after all, I owe her mother a
return in kind. She was not afraid to trifle with destiny.”

But Hamilton was asleep in his chair.


Next morning Imogen found only Miss Broadwood in the breakfast room.

“Good morning, my dear girl, whatever are you doing up so early ? They
never breakfast before eleven. Most of them take their coffee in their
room. Take this place by me.”

Miss Broadwood looked particularly fresh and encouraging in her blue
serge walking skirt, her open jacket displaying an expanse of stiff,
white shirt bosom, dotted with some almost imperceptible figure, and
a dark blue-and-white necktie, neatly knotted under her wide, rolling
collar. She wore a white rosebud in the lapel of her coat, and decidedly
she seemed more than ever like a nice, clean boy on his holiday. Imogen
was just hoping that they would breakfast alone when Miss Broadwood
exclaimed, “Ah, there comes Arthur with the children. That's the reward
of early rising in this house; you never get to see the youngsters at
any other time.”

Hamilton entered, followed by two dark, handsome little boys. The girl,
who was very tiny, blonde like her mother, and exceedingly frail, he
carried in his arms. The boys came up and said good morning with an ease
and cheerfulness uncommon, even in well-bred children, but the little
girl hid her face on her father's shoulder.

“She's a shy little lady,” he explained as he put her gently down in her
chair. “I'm afraid she's like her father; she can't seem to get used to
meeting people. And you, Miss Willard, did you dream of the White Rabbit
or the Little Mermaid ?”

“Oh, I dreamed of them all! All the personages of that buried
civilization,” cried Imogen, delighted that his estranged manner of the
night before had entirely vanished and feeling that, somehow, the old
confidential relations had been restored during the night.

“Come, William,” said Miss Broadwood, turning to the younger of the two
boys, “and what did you dream about ?”

“We dreamed,” said William gravely--he was the more assertive of the two
and always spoke for both--“we dreamed that there were fireworks hidden
in the basement of the carriage house; lots and lots of fireworks.”

His elder brother looked up at him with apprehensive astonishment, while
Miss Broadwood hastily put her napkin to her lips and Hamilton dropped
his eyes. “If little boys dream things, they are so apt not to come
true,” he reflected sadly. This shook even the redoubtable William, and
he glanced nervously at his brother. “But do things vanish just because
they have been dreamed ?” he objected.

“Generally that is the very best reason for their vanishing,” said
Arthur gravely.

“But, Father, people can't help what they dream,” remonstrated Edward
gently.

“Oh, come! You're making these children talk like a Maeterlinck
dialogue,” laughed Miss Broadwood.

Flavia presently entered, a book in her hand, and bade them all good
morning. “Come, little people, which story shall it be this morning ?”
 she asked winningly. Greatly excited, the children followed her into
the garden. “She does then, sometimes,” murmured Imogen as they left the
breakfast room.

“Oh, yes, to be sure,” said Miss Broadwood cheerfully. “She reads a
story to them every morning in the most picturesque part of the garden.
The mother of the Gracchi, you know. She does so long, she says, for the
time when they will be intellectual companions for her. What do you say
to a walk over the hills ?”

As they left the house they met Frau Lichtenfeld and the bushy
Herr Schotte--the professor cut an astonishing figure in golf
stockings--returning from a walk and engaged in an animated conversation
on the tendencies of German fiction.

“Aren't they the most attractive little children,” exclaimed Imogen as
they wound down the road toward the river.

“Yes, and you must not fail to tell Flavia that you think so. She will
look at you in a sort of startled way and say, 'Yes, aren't they ?' and
maybe she will go off and hunt them up and have tea with them, to fully
appreciate them. She is awfully afraid of missing anything good, is
Flavia. The way those youngsters manage to conceal their guilty presence
in the House of Song is a wonder.”

“But don't any of the artist-folk fancy children ?” asked Imogen.

“Yes, they just fancy them and no more. The chemist remarked the other
day that children are like certain salts which need not be actualized
because the formulae are quite sufficient for practical purposes. I
don't see how even Flavia can endure to have that man about.”

“I have always been rather curious to know what Arthur thinks of it
all,” remarked Imogen cautiously.

“Thinks of it!” ejaculated Miss Broadwood. “Why, my dear, what would any
man think of having his house turned into an hotel, habited by freaks
who discharge his servants, borrow his money, and insult his neighbors ?
This place is shunned like a lazaretto!”

“Well, then, why does he--why does he--” persisted Imogen.

“Bah!” interrupted Miss Broadwood impatiently, “why did he in the first
place ? That's the question.”

“Marry her, you mean ?” said Imogen coloring.

“Exactly so,” said Miss Broadwood sharply, as she snapped the lid of her
matchbox.

“I suppose that is a question rather beyond us, and certainly one which
we cannot discuss,” said Imogen. “But his toleration on this one point
puzzles me, quite apart from other complications.”

“Toleration ? Why this point, as you call it, simply is Flavia. Who could
conceive of her without it ? I don't know where it's all going to end,
I'm sure, and I'm equally sure that, if it were not for Arthur,
I shouldn't care,” declared Miss Broadwood, drawing her shoulders
together.

“But will it end at all, now ?”

“Such an absurd state of things can't go on indefinitely. A man isn't
going to see his wife make a guy of herself forever, is he ? Chaos
has already begun in the servants' quarters. There are six different
languages spoken there now. You see, it's all on an entirely false
basis. Flavia hasn't the slightest notion of what these people are
really like, their good and their bad alike escape her. They, on the
other hand, can't imagine what she is driving at. Now, Arthur is worse
off than either faction; he is not in the fairy story in that he sees
these people exactly as they are, _but_ he is utterly unable to see
Flavia as they see her. There you have the situation. Why can't he see
her as we do ? My dear, that has kept me awake o' nights. This man who
has thought so much and lived so much, who is naturally a critic, really
takes Flavia at very nearly her own estimate. But now I am entering upon
a wilderness. From a brief acquaintance with her you can know nothing of
the icy fastnesses of Flavia's self-esteem. It's like St. Peter's; you
can't realize its magnitude at once. You have to grow into a sense of
it by living under its shadow. It has perplexed even Emile Roux, that
merciless dissector of egoism. She has puzzled him the more because he
saw at a glance what some of them do not perceive at once, and what will
be mercifully concealed from Arthur until the trump sounds; namely, that
all Flavia's artists have done or ever will do means exactly as much to
her as a symphony means to an oyster; that there is no bridge by which
the significance of any work of art could be conveyed to her.”

“Then, in the name of goodness, why does she bother ?” gasped Imogen.
“She is pretty, wealthy, well-established; why should she bother ?”

“That's what M. Roux has kept asking himself. I can't pretend to analyze
it. She reads papers on the Literary Landmarks of Paris, the Loves of
the Poets, and that sort of thing, to clubs out in Chicago. To Flavia
it is more necessary to be called clever than to breathe. I would give a
good deal to know that glum Frenchman's diagnosis. He has been
watching her out of those fishy eyes of his as a biologist watches a
hemisphereless frog.”

For several days after M. Roux's departure Flavia gave an embarrassing
share of her attention to Imogen. Embarrassing, because Imogen had the
feeling of being energetically and futilely explored, she knew not for
what. She felt herself under the globe of an air pump, expected to yield
up something. When she confined the conversation to matters of general
interest Flavia conveyed to her with some pique that her one endeavor
in life had been to fit herself to converse with her friends upon those
things which vitally interested them. “One has no right to accept their
best from people unless one gives, isn't it so ? I want to be able to
give--!” she declared vaguely. Yet whenever Imogen strove to pay her
tithes and plunged bravely into her plans for study next winter, Flavia
grew absent-minded and interrupted her by amazing generalizations or
by such embarrassing questions as, “And these grim studies really have
charm for you; you are quite buried in them; they make other things seem
light and ephemeral ?”

“I rather feel as though I had got in here under false pretenses,”
 Imogen confided to Miss Broadwood. “I'm sure I don't know what it is
that she wants of me.”

“Ah,” chuckled Jemima, “you are not equal to these heart to heart talks
with Flavia. You utterly fail to communicate to her the atmosphere of
that untroubled joy in which you dwell. You must remember that she gets
no feeling out of things herself, and she demands that you impart yours
to her by some process of psychic transmission. I once met a blind girl,
blind from birth, who could discuss the peculiarities of the Barbizon
school with just Flavia's glibness and enthusiasm. Ordinarily Flavia
knows how to get what she wants from people, and her memory is
wonderful. One evening I heard her giving Frau Lichtenfeld some random
impressions about Hedda Gabler which she extracted from me five years
ago; giving them with an impassioned conviction of which I was never
guilty. But I have known other people who could appropriate your stories
and opinions; Flavia is infinitely more subtle than that; she can
soak up the very thrash and drift of your daydreams, and take the very
thrills off your back, as it were.”

After some days of unsuccessful effort, Flavia withdrew herself, and
Imogen found Hamilton ready to catch her when she was tossed afield.
He seemed only to have been awaiting this crisis, and at once their
old intimacy reestablished itself as a thing inevitable and beautifully
prepared for. She convinced herself that she had not been mistaken in
him, despite all the doubts that had come up in later years, and this
renewal of faith set more than one question thumping in her brain. “How
did he, how can he ?” she kept repeating with a tinge of her childish
resentment, “what right had he to waste anything so fine ?”

When Imogen and Arthur were returning from a walk before luncheon one
morning about a week after M. Roux's departure, they noticed an absorbed
group before one of the hall windows. Herr Schotte and Restzhoff sat
on the window seat with a newspaper between them, while Wellington,
Schemetzkin, and Will Maidenwood looked over their shoulders. They
seemed intensely interested, Herr Schotte occasionally pounding his
knees with his fists in ebullitions of barbaric glee. When imogen
entered the hall, however, the men were all sauntering toward the
breakfast room and the paper was lying innocently on the divan. During
luncheon the personnel of that window group were unwontedly animated and
agreeable all save Schemetzkin, whose stare was blanker than ever, as
though Roux's mantle of insulting indifference had fallen upon him, in
addition to his own oblivious self-absorption. Will Maidenwood seemed
embarrassed and annoyed; the chemist employed himself with making polite
speeches to Hamilton. Flavia did not come down to lunch--and there was
a malicious gleam under Herr Schotte's eyebrows. Frank Wellington
announced nervously that an imperative letter from his protecting
syndicate summoned him to the city.

After luncheon the men went to the golf links, and Imogen, at the first
opportunity, possessed herself of the newspaper which had been left on
the divan. One of the first things that caught her eye was an article
headed “Roux on Tuft Hunters; The Advanced American Woman as He Sees
Her; Aggressive, Superficial, and Insincere.” The entire interview was
nothing more nor less than a satiric characterization of Flavia, aquiver
with irritation and vitriolic malice. No one could mistake it; it was
done with all his deftness of portraiture. Imogen had not finished the
article when she heard a footstep, and clutching the paper she started
precipitately toward the stairway as Arthur entered. He put out his
hand, looking critically at her distressed face.

“Wait a moment, Miss Willard,” he said peremptorily, “I want to see
whether we can find what it was that so interested our friends this
morning. Give me the paper, please.”

Imogen grew quite white as he opened the journal. She reached forward
and crumpled it with her hands. “Please don't, please don't,” she
pleaded; “it's something I don't want you to see. Oh, why will you ? it's
just something low and despicable that you can't notice.”

Arthur had gently loosed her hands, and he pointed her to a chair. He
lit a cigar and read the article through without comment. When he had
finished it he walked to the fireplace, struck a match, and tossed the
flaming journal between the brass andirons.

“You are right,” he remarked as he came back, dusting his hands with his
handkerchief. “It's quite impossible to comment. There are extremes of
blackguardism for which we have no name. The only thing necessary is to
see that Flavia gets no wind of this. This seems to be my cue to act;
poor girl.”

Imogen looked at him tearfully; she could only murmur, “Oh, why did you
read it!”

Hamilton laughed spiritlessly. “Come, don't you worry about it. You
always took other people's troubles too seriously. When you were little
and all the world was gay and everybody happy, you must needs get the
Little Mermaid's troubles to grieve over. Come with me into the music
room. You remember the musical setting I once made you for the Lay of
the Jabberwock ? I was trying it over the other night, long after you
were in bed, and I decided it was quite as fine as the Erl-King music.
How I wish I could give you some of the cake that Alice ate and make you
a little girl again. Then, when you had got through the glass door into
the little garden, you could call to me, perhaps, and tell me all the
fine things that were going on there. What a pity it is that you ever
grew up!” he added, laughing; and Imogen, too, was thinking just that.

At dinner that evening, Flavia, with fatal persistence, insisted upon
turning the conversation to M. Roux. She had been reading one of his
novels and had remembered anew that Paris set its watches by his clock.
Imogen surmised that she was tortured by a feeling that she had not
sufficiently appreciated him while she had had him. When she first
mentioned his name she was answered only by the pall of silence that
fell over the company. Then everyone began to talk at once, as though
to correct a false position. They spoke of him with a fervid, defiant
admiration, with the sort of hot praise that covers a double purpose.
Imogen fancied she could see that they felt a kind of relief at what the
man had done, even those who despised him for doing it; that they felt
a spiteful hate against Flavia, as though she had tricked them, and a
certain contempt for themselves that they had been beguiled. She was
reminded of the fury of the crowd in the fairy tale, when once the child
had called out that the king was in his night clothes. Surely these
people knew no more about Flavia than they had known before, but the
mere fact that the thing had been said altered the situation. Flavia,
meanwhile, sat chattering amiably, pathetically unconscious of her
nakedness.

Hamilton lounged, fingering the stem of his wineglass, gazing down the
table at one face after another and studying the various degrees
of self-consciousness they exhibited. Imogen's eyes followed his,
fearfully. When a lull came in the spasmodic flow of conversation,
Arthur, leaning back in his chair, remarked deliberately, “As for M.
Roux, his very profession places him in that class of men whom society
has never been able to accept unconditionally because it has never been
able to assume that they have any ordered notion of taste. He and
his ilk remain, with the mountebanks and snake charmers, people
indispensable to our civilization, but wholly unreclaimed by it; people
whom we receive, but whose invitations we do not accept.”

Fortunately for Flavia, this mine was not exploded until just before the
coffee was brought. Her laughter was pitiful to hear; it echoed through
the silent room as in a vault, while she made some tremulously light
remark about her husband's drollery, grim as a jest from the dying. No
one responded and she sat nodding her head like a mechanical toy and
smiling her white, set smile through her teeth, until Alcee Buisson and
Frau Lichtenfeld came to her support.

After dinner the guests retired immediately to their rooms, and Imogen
went upstairs on tiptoe, feeling the echo of breakage and the dust of
crumbling in the air. She wondered whether Flavia's habitual note of
uneasiness were not, in a manner, prophetic, and a sort of unconscious
premonition, after all. She sat down to write a letter, but she found
herself so nervous, her head so hot and her hands so cold, that she
soon abandoned the effort, just as she was about to seek Miss Broadwood,
Flavia entered and embraced her hysterically.

“My dearest girl,” she began, “was there ever such an unfortunate and
incomprehensible speech made before ? Of course it is scarcely necessary
to explain to you poor Arthur's lack of tact, and that he meant nothing.
But they! Can they be expected to understand ? He will feel wretchedly
about it when he realizes what he has done, but in the meantime ? And M.
Roux, of all men! When we were so fortunate as to get him, and he made
himself so unreservedly agreeable, and I fancied that, in his way,
Arthur quite admired him. My dear, you have no idea what that speech has
done. Schemetzkin and Herr Schotte have already sent me word that they
must leave us tomorrow. Such a thing from a host!” Flavia paused, choked
by tears of vexation and despair.

Imogen was thoroughly disconcerted; this was the first time she had ever
seen Flavia betray any personal emotion which was indubitably genuine.
She replied with what consolation she could. “Need they take it
personally at all ? It was a mere observation upon a class of people--”

“Which he knows nothing whatever about, and with whom he has no
sympathy,” interrupted Flavia. “Ah, my dear, you could not be _expected_
to understand. You can't realize, knowing Arthur as you do, his entire
lack of any aesthetic sense whatever. He is absolutely _nil_, stone deaf
and stark blind, on that side. He doesn't mean to be brutal, it is
just the brutality of utter ignorance. They always feel it--they are so
sensitive to unsympathetic influences, you know; they know it the moment
they come into the house. I have spent my life apologizing for him and
struggling to conceal it; but in spite of me, he wounds them; his very
attitude, even in silence, offends them. Heavens! Do I not know ? Is
it not perpetually and forever wounding me ? But there has never been
anything so dreadful as this--never! If I could conceive of any possible
motive, even!”

“But, surely, Mrs. Hamilton, it was, after all, a mere expression of
opinion, such as we are any of us likely to venture upon any subject
whatever. It was neither more personal nor more extravagant than many of
M. Roux's remarks.”

“But, Imogen, certainly M. Roux has the right. It is a part of his
art, and that is altogether another matter. Oh, this is not the only
instance!” continued Flavia passionately, “I've always had that narrow,
bigoted prejudice to contend with. It has always held me back. But
this--!”

“I think you mistake his attitude,” replied Imogen, feeling a flush that
made her ears tingle. “That is, I fancy he is more appreciative than he
seems. A man can't be very demonstrative about those things--not if he
is a real man. I should not think you would care much about saving the
feelings of people who are too narrow to admit of any other point of
view than their own.” She stopped, finding herself in the impossible
position of attempting to explain Hamilton to his wife; a task which,
if once begun, would necessitate an entire course of enlightenment which
she doubted Flavia's ability to receive, and which she could offer only
with very poor grace.

“That's just where it stings most”--here Flavia began pacing the
floor--“it is just because they have all shown such tolerance and have
treated Arthur with such unfailing consideration that I can find no
reasonable pretext for his rancor. How can he fail to see the value of
such friendships on the children's account, if for nothing else! What
an advantage for them to grow up among such associations! Even though he
cares nothing about these things himself he might realize that. Is there
nothing I could say by way of explanation ? To them, I mean ? If someone
were to explain to them how unfortunately limited he is in these
things--”

“I'm afraid I cannot advise you,” said Imogen decidedly, “but that, at
least, seems to me impossible.”

Flavia took her hand and glanced at her affectionately, nodding
nervously. “Of course, dear girl, I can't ask you to be quite frank with
me. Poor child, you are trembling and your hands are icy. Poor Arthur!
But you must not judge him by this altogether; think how much he misses
in life. What a cruel shock you've had. I'll send you some sherry, Good
night, my dear.”

When Flavia shut the door Imogen burst into a fit of nervous weeping.

Next morning she awoke after a troubled and restless night. At eight
o'clock Miss Broadwood entered in a red and white striped bathrobe.

“Up, up, and see the great doom's image!” she cried, her eyes sparkling
with excitement. “The hall is full of trunks, they are packing. What
bolt has fallen ? It's you, _ma cherie_, you've brought Ulysses
home again and the slaughter has begun!” she blew a cloud of smoke
triumphantly from her lips and threw herself into a chair beside the
bed.

Imogen, rising on her elbow, plunged excitedly into the story of the
Roux interview, which Miss Broadwood heard with the keenest interest,
frequently interrupting her with exclamations of delight. When Imogen
reached the dramatic scene which terminated in the destruction of the
newspaper, Miss Broadwood rose and took a turn about the room, violently
switching the tasselled cords of her bathrobe.

“Stop a moment,” she cried, “you mean to tell me that he had such a
heaven-sent means to bring her to her senses and didn't use it--that he
held such a weapon and threw it away ?”

“Use it ?” cried Imogen unsteadily. “Of course he didn't! He bared his
back to the tormentor, signed himself over to punishment in that speech
he made at dinner, which everyone understands but Flavia. She was here
for an hour last night and disregarded every limit of taste in her
maledictions.”

“My dear!” cried Miss Broadwood, catching her hand in inordinate delight
at the situation, “do you see what he has done ? There'll be no end to
it. Why he has sacrificed himself to spare the very vanity that devours
him, put rancors in the vessels of his peace, and his eternal jewel
given to the common enemy of man, to make them kings, the seed of Banquo
kings! He is magnificent!”

“Isn't he always that ?” cried Imogen hotly. “He's like a pillar of
sanity and law in this house of shams and swollen vanities, where people
stalk about with a sort of madhouse dignity, each one fancying himself a
king or a pope. If you could have heard that woman talk of him! Why,
she thinks him stupid, bigoted, blinded by middleclass prejudices. She
talked about his having no aesthetic sense and insisted that her artists
had always shown him tolerance. I don't know why it should get on my
nerves so, I'm sure, but her stupidity and assurance are enough to drive
one to the brink of collapse.”

“Yes, as opposed to his singular fineness, they are calculated to do
just that,” said Miss Broadwood gravely, wisely ignoring Imogen's tears.
“But what has been is nothing to what will be. Just wait until Flavia's
black swans have flown! You ought not to try to stick it out; that would
only make it harder for everyone. Suppose you let me telephone your
mother to wire you to come home by the evening train ?”

“Anything, rather than have her come at me like that again. It puts me
in a perfectly impossible position, and he _is_ so fine!”

“Of course it does,” said Miss Broadwood sympathetically, “and there
is no good to be got from facing it. I will stay because such things
interest me, and Frau Lichtenfeld will stay because she has no money to
get away, and Buisson will stay because he feels somewhat responsible.
These complications are interesting enough to cold-blooded folk
like myself who have an eye for the dramatic element, but they are
distracting and demoralizing to young people with any serious purpose in
life.”

Miss Broadwood's counsel was all the more generous seeing that, for her,
the most interesting element of this denouement would be eliminated by
Imogen's departure. “If she goes now, she'll get over it,” soliloquized
Miss Broadwood. “If she stays, she'll be wrung for him and the hurt may
go deep enough to last. I haven't the heart to see her spoiling things
for herself.” She telephoned Mrs. Willard and helped Imogen to pack. She
even took it upon herself to break the news of Imogen's going to Arthur,
who remarked, as he rolled a cigarette in his nerveless fingers:

“Right enough, too. What should she do here with old cynics like you and
me, Jimmy ? Seeing that she is brim full of dates and formulae and other
positivisms, and is so girt about with illusions that she still casts
a shadow in the sun. You've been very tender of her, haven't you ? I've
watched you. And to think it may all be gone when we see her next. 'The
common fate of all things rare,' you know. What a good fellow you
are, anyway, Jimmy,” he added, putting his hands affectionately on her
shoulders.

Arthur went with them to the station. Flavia was so prostrated by the
concerted action of her guests that she was able to see Imogen only
for a moment in her darkened sleeping chamber, where she kissed her
hysterically, without lifting her head, bandaged in aromatic vinegar.
On the way to the station both Arthur and Imogen threw the burden of
keeping up appearances entirely upon Miss Broadwood, who blithely rose
to the occasion. When Hamilton carried Imogen's bag into the car, Miss
Broadwood detained her for a moment, whispering as she gave her a large,
warm handclasp, “I'll come to see you when I get back to town; and, in
the meantime, if you meet any of our artists, tell them you have left
Caius Marius among the ruins of Carthage.”




The Sculptor's Funeral

A group of the townspeople stood on the station siding of a little
Kansas town, awaiting the coming of the night train, which was already
twenty minutes overdue. The snow had fallen thick over everything; in
the pale starlight the line of bluffs across the wide, white meadows
south of the town made soft, smoke-colored curves against the clear sky.
The men on the siding stood first on one foot and then on the other,
their hands thrust deep into their trousers pockets, their overcoats
open, their shoulders screwed up with the cold; and they glanced from
time to time toward the southeast, where the railroad track wound along
the river shore. They conversed in low tones and moved about restlessly,
seeming uncertain as to what was expected of them. There was but one of
the company who looked as though he knew exactly why he was there; and
he kept conspicuously apart; walking to the far end of the platform,
returning to the station door, then pacing up the track again, his chin
sunk in the high collar of his overcoat, his burly shoulders drooping
forward, his gait heavy and dogged. Presently he was approached by a
tall, spare, grizzled man clad in a faded Grand Army suit, who shuffled
out from the group and advanced with a certain deference, craning his
neck forward until his back made the angle of a jackknife three-quarters
open.

“I reckon she's agoin' to be pretty late ag'in tonight, Jim,” he
remarked in a squeaky falsetto. “S'pose it's the snow ?”

“I don't know,” responded the other man with a shade of annoyance,
speaking from out an astonishing cataract of red beard that grew
fiercely and thickly in all directions.

The spare man shifted the quill toothpick he was chewing to the other
side of his mouth. “It ain't likely that anybody from the East will come
with the corpse, I s'pose,” he went on reflectively.

“I don't know,” responded the other, more curtly than before.

“It's too bad he didn't belong to some lodge or other. I like an
order funeral myself. They seem more appropriate for people of some
reputation,” the spare man continued, with an ingratiating concession
in his shrill voice, as he carefully placed his toothpick in his vest
pocket. He always carried the flag at the G. A. R. funerals in the town.

The heavy man turned on his heel, without replying, and walked up the
siding. The spare man shuffled back to the uneasy group. “Jim's ez full
ez a tick, ez ushel,” he commented commiseratingly.

Just then a distant whistle sounded, and there was a shuffling of feet
on the platform. A number of lanky boys of all ages appeared as suddenly
and slimily as eels wakened by the crack of thunder; some came from the
waiting room, where they had been warming themselves by the red stove,
or half-asleep on the slat benches; others uncoiled themselves from
baggage trucks or slid out of express wagons. Two clambered down from
the driver's seat of a hearse that stood backed up against the siding.
They straightened their stooping shoulders and lifted their heads, and
a flash of momentary animation kindled their dull eyes at that cold,
vibrant scream, the world-wide call for men. It stirred them like the
note of a trumpet; just as it had often stirred the man who was coming
home tonight, in his boyhood.

The night express shot, red as a rocket, from out the eastward marsh
lands and wound along the river shore under the long lines of shivering
poplars that sentineled the meadows, the escaping steam hanging in gray
masses against the pale sky and blotting out the Milky Way. In a moment
the red glare from the headlight streamed up the snow-covered track
before the siding and glittered on the wet, black rails. The burly man
with the disheveled red beard walked swiftly up the platform toward
the approaching train, uncovering his head as he went. The group of
men behind him hesitated, glanced questioningly at one another, and
awkwardly followed his example. The train stopped, and the crowd
shuffled up to the express car just as the door was thrown open,
the spare man in the G. A. B. suit thrusting his head forward with
curiosity. The express messenger appeared in the doorway, accompanied by
a young man in a long ulster and traveling cap.

“Are Mr. Merrick's friends here ?” inquired the young man.

The group on the platform swayed and shuffled uneasily. Philip Phelps,
the banker, responded with dignity: “We have come to take charge of the
body. Mr. Merrick's father is very feeble and can't be about.”

“Send the agent out here,” growled the express messenger, “and tell the
operator to lend a hand.”

The coffin was got out of its rough box and down on the snowy platform.
The townspeople drew back enough to make room for it and then formed a
close semicircle about it, looking curiously at the palm leaf which lay
across the black cover. No one said anything. The baggage man stood by
his truck, waiting to get at the trunks. The engine panted heavily, and
the fireman dodged in and out among the wheels with his yellow torch and
long oilcan, snapping the spindle boxes. The young Bostonian, one of
the dead sculptor's pupils who had come with the body, looked about him
helplessly. He turned to the banker, the only one of that black,
uneasy, stoop-shouldered group who seemed enough of an individual to be
addressed.

“None of Mr. Merrick's brothers are here ?” he asked uncertainly.

The man with the red heard for the first time stepped up and joined the
group. “No, they have not come yet; the family is scattered. The body
will be taken directly to the house.” He stooped and took hold of one of
the handles of the coffin.

“Take the long hill road up, Thompson--it will be easier on the horses,”
 called the liveryman as the undertaker snapped the door of the hearse
and prepared to mount to the driver's seat.

Laird, the red-bearded lawyer, turned again to the stranger: “We didn't
know whether there would be anyone with him or not,” he explained. “It's
a long walk, so you'd better go up in the hack.” He pointed to a single,
battered conveyance, but the young man replied stiffly: “Thank you, but
I think I will go up with the hearse. If you don't object,” turning to
the undertaker, “I'll ride with you.”

They clambered up over the wheels and drove off in the starlight tip the
long, white hill toward the town. The lamps in the still village were
shining from under the low, snow-burdened roofs; and beyond, on every
side, the plains reached out into emptiness, peaceful and wide as the
soft sky itself, and wrapped in a tangible, white silence.

When the hearse backed up to a wooden sidewalk before a naked,
weatherbeaten frame house, the same composite, ill-defined group that
had stood upon the station siding was huddled about the gate. The front
yard was an icy swamp, and a couple of warped planks, extending from the
sidewalk to the door, made a sort of rickety footbridge. The gate hung
on one hinge and was opened wide with difficulty. Steavens, the young
stranger, noticed that something black was tied to the knob of the front
door.

The grating sound made by the casket, as it was drawn from the hearse,
was answered by a scream from the house; the front door was wrenched
open, and a tall, corpulent woman rushed out bareheaded into the snow
and flung herself upon the coffin, shrieking: “My boy, my boy! And this
is how you've come home to me!”

As Steavens turned away and closed his eyes with a shudder of
unutterable repulsion, another woman, also tall, but flat and angular,
dressed entirely in black, darted out of the house and caught Mrs.
Merrick by the shoulders, crying sharply: “Come, come, Mother; you
mustn't go on like this!” Her tone changed to one of obsequious
solemnity as she turned to the banker: “The parlor is ready, Mr.
Phelps.”

The bearers carried the coffin along the narrow boards, while the
undertaker ran ahead with the coffin-rests. They bore it into a large,
unheated room that smelled of dampness and disuse and furniture polish,
and set it down under a hanging lamp ornamented with jingling glass
prisms and before a “Rogers group” of John Alden and Priscilla,
wreathed with smilax. Henry Steavens stared about him with the sickening
conviction that there had been some horrible mistake, and that he had
somehow arrived at the wrong destination. He looked painfully about
over the clover-green Brussels, the fat plush upholstery, among the
hand-painted china plaques and panels, and vases, for some mark of
identification, for something that might once conceivably have belonged
to Harvey Merrick. It was not until he recognized his friend in the
crayon portrait of a little boy in kilts and curls hanging above the
piano that he felt willing to let any of these people approach the
coffin.

“Take the lid off, Mr. Thompson; let me see my boy's face,” wailed
the elder woman between her sobs. This time Steavens looked fearfully,
almost beseechingly into her face, red and swollen under its masses
of strong, black, shiny hair. He flushed, dropped his eyes, and then,
almost incredulously, looked again. There was a kind of power about
her face--a kind of brutal handsomeness, even, but it was scarred and
furrowed by violence, and so colored and coarsened by fiercer passions
that grief seemed never to have laid a gentle finger there. The long
nose was distended and knobbed at the end, and there were deep lines
on either side of it; her heavy, black brows almost met across her
forehead; her teeth were large and square and set far apart--teeth that
could tear. She filled the room; the men were obliterated, seemed tossed
about like twigs in an angry water, and even Steavens felt himself being
drawn into the whirlpool.

The daughter--the tall, rawboned woman in crepe, with a mourning comb in
her hair which curiously lengthened her long face sat stiffly upon the
sofa, her hands, conspicuous for their large knuckles, folded in her
lap, her mouth and eyes drawn down, solemnly awaiting the opening of the
coffin. Near the door stood a mulatto woman, evidently a servant in
the house, with a timid bearing and an emaciated face pitifully sad and
gentle. She was weeping silently, the corner of her calico apron lifted
to her eyes, occasionally suppressing a long, quivering sob. Steavens
walked over and stood beside her.

Feeble steps were heard on the stairs, and an old man, tall and frail,
odorous of pipe smoke, with shaggy, unkept gray hair and a dingy beard,
tobacco stained about the mouth, entered uncertainly. He went slowly up
to the coffin and stood, rolling a blue cotton handkerchief between his
hands, seeming so pained and embarrassed by his wife's orgy of grief
that he had no consciousness of anything else.

“There, there, Annie, dear, don't take on so,” he quavered timidly,
putting out a shaking hand and awkwardly patting her elbow. She turned
with a cry and sank upon his shoulder with such violence that he
tottered a little. He did not even glance toward the coffin, but
continued to look at her with a dull, frightened, appealing expression,
as a spaniel looks at the whip. His sunken cheeks slowly reddened and
burned with miserable shame. When his wife rushed from the room her
daughter strode after her with set lips. The servant stole up to the
coffin, bent over it for a moment, and then slipped away to the kitchen,
leaving Steavens, the lawyer, and the father to themselves. The old man
stood trembling and looking down at his dead son's face. The sculptor's
splendid head seemed even more noble in its rigid stillness than in
life. The dark hair had crept down upon the wide forehead; the face
seemed strangely long, but in it there was not that beautiful and chaste
repose which we expect to find in the faces of the dead. The brows were
so drawn that there were two deep lines above the beaked nose, and the
chin was thrust forward defiantly. It was as though the strain of life
had been so sharp and bitter that death could not at once wholly relax
the tension and smooth the countenance into perfect peace--as though he
were still guarding something precious and holy, which might even yet be
wrested from him.

The old man's lips were working under his stained beard. He turned to
the lawyer with timid deference: “Phelps and the rest are comin' back to
set up with Harve, ain't they ?” he asked. “Thank 'ee, Jim, thank 'ee.”
 He brushed the hair back gently from his son's forehead. “He was a good
boy, Jim; always a good boy. He was ez gentle ez a child and the kindest
of 'em all--only we didn't none of us ever onderstand him.” The tears
trickled slowly down his beard and dropped upon the sculptor's coat.

“Martin, Martin. Oh, Martin! come here,” his wife wailed from the top of
the stairs. The old man started timorously: “Yes, Annie, I'm coming.” He
turned away, hesitated stood for a moment in miserable indecision; then
he reached back and patted the dead man's hair softly, and stumbled from
the room.

“Poor old man, I didn't think he had any tears left. Seems as if his
eyes would have gone dry long ago. At his age nothing cuts very deep,”
 remarked the lawyer.

Something in his tone made Steavens glance up. While the mother had been
in the room the young man had scarcely seen anyone else; but now, from
the moment he first glanced into Jim Laird's florid face and bloodshot
eyes, he knew that he had found what he had been heartsick at not
finding before--the feeling, the understanding, that must exist in
someone, even here.

The man was red as his beard, with features swollen and blurred by
dissipation, and a hot, blazing blue eye. His face was strained--that of
a man who is controlling himself with difficulty--and he kept plucking
at his beard with a sort of fierce resentment. Steavens, sitting by
the window, watched him turn down the glaring lamp, still its jangling
pendants with an angry gesture, and then stand with his hands locked
behind him, staring down into the master's face. He could not help
wondering what link there could have been between the porcelain vessel
and so sooty a lump of potter's clay.

From the kitchen an uproar was sounding; when the dining-room door
opened the import of it was clear. The mother was abusing the maid for
having forgotten to make the dressing for the chicken salad which had
been prepared for the watchers. Steavens had never heard anything in
the least like it; it was injured, emotional, dramatic abuse, unique and
masterly in its excruciating cruelty, as violent and unrestrained as had
been her grief of twenty minutes before. With a shudder of disgust the
lawyer went into the dining room and closed the door into the kitchen.

“Poor Roxy's getting it now,” he remarked when he came back. “The
Merricks took her out of the poorhouse years ago; and if her loyalty
would let her, I guess the poor old thing could tell tales that would
curdle your blood. She's the mulatto woman who was standing in here a
while ago, with her apron to her eyes. The old woman is a fury; there
never was anybody like her for demonstrative piety and ingenious
cruelty. She made Harvey's life a hell for him when he lived at home;
he was so sick ashamed of it. I never could see how he kept himself so
sweet.”

“He was wonderful,” said Steavens slowly, “wonderful; but until tonight
I have never known how wonderful.”

“That is the true and eternal wonder of it, anyway; that it can come
even from such a dung heap as this,” the lawyer cried, with a sweeping
gesture which seemed to indicate much more than the four walls within
which they stood.

“I think I'll see whether I can get a little air. The room is so close
I am beginning to feel rather faint,” murmured Steavens, struggling with
one of the windows. The sash was stuck, however, and would not yield, so
he sat down dejectedly and began pulling at his collar. The lawyer came
over, loosened the sash with one blow of his red fist, and sent the
window up a few inches. Steavens thanked him, but the nausea which had
been gradually climbing into his throat for the last half-hour left him
with but one desire--a desperate feeling that he must get away from this
place with what was left of Harvey Merrick. Oh, he comprehended well
enough now the quiet bitterness of the smile that he had seen so often
on his master's lips!

He remembered that once, when Merrick returned from a visit home, he
brought with him a singularly feeling and suggestive bas-relief of a
thin, faded old woman, sitting and sewing something pinned to her knee;
while a full-lipped, full-blooded little urchin, his trousers held up
by a single gallows, stood beside her, impatiently twitching her gown to
call her attention to a butterfly he had caught. Steavens, impressed by
the tender and delicate modeling of the thin, tired face, had asked him
if it were his mother. He remembered the dull flush that had burned up
in the sculptor's face.

The lawyer was sitting in a rocking chair beside the coffin, his head
thrown back and his eyes closed. Steavens looked at him earnestly,
puzzled at the line of the chin, and wondering why a man should conceal
a feature of such distinction under that disfiguring shock of beard.
Suddenly, as though he felt the young sculptor's keen glance, he opened
his eyes.

“Was he always a good deal of an oyster ?” he asked abruptly. “He was
terribly shy as a boy.”

“Yes, he was an oyster, since you put it so,” rejoined Steavens.
“Although he could be very fond of people, he always gave one the
impression of being detached. He disliked violent emotion; he was
reflective, and rather distrustful of himself--except, of course, as
regarded his work. He was surefooted enough there. He distrusted men
pretty thoroughly and women even more, yet somehow without believing ill
of them. He was determined, indeed, to believe the best, but he seemed
afraid to investigate.”

“A burnt dog dreads the fire,” said the lawyer grimly, and closed his
eyes.

Steavens went on and on, reconstructing that whole miserable boyhood.
All this raw, biting ugliness had been the portion of the man whose
tastes were refined beyond the limits of the reasonable--whose mind was
an exhaustless gallery of beautiful impressions, and so sensitive that
the mere shadow of a poplar leaf flickering against a sunny wall would
be etched and held there forever. Surely, if ever a man had the magic
word in his fingertips, it was Merrick. Whatever he touched, he revealed
its holiest secret; liberated it from enchantment and restored it to its
pristine loveliness, like the Arabian prince who fought the enchantress
spell for spell. Upon whatever he had come in contact with, he had left
a beautiful record of the experience--a sort of ethereal signature; a
scent, a sound, a color that was his own.

Steavens understood now the real tragedy of his master's life; neither
love nor wine, as many had conjectured, but a blow which had fallen
earlier and cut deeper than these could have done--a shame not his, and
yet so unescapably his, to bide in his heart from his very boyhood. And
without--the frontier warfare; the yearning of a boy, cast ashore upon a
desert of newness and ugliness and sordidness, for all that is chastened
and old, and noble with traditions.

At eleven o'clock the tall, flat woman in black crepe entered, announced
that the watchers were arriving, and asked them “to step into the dining
room.” As Steavens rose the lawyer said dryly: “You go on--it'll be a
good experience for you, doubtless; as for me, I'm not equal to that
crowd tonight; I've had twenty years of them.”

As Steavens closed the door after him be glanced back at the lawyer,
sitting by the coffin in the dim light, with his chin resting on his
hand.

The same misty group that had stood before the door of the express car
shuffled into the dining room. In the light of the kerosene lamp they
separated and became individuals. The minister, a pale, feeble-looking
man with white hair and blond chin-whiskers, took his seat beside a
small side table and placed his Bible upon it. The Grand Army man sat
down behind the stove and tilted his chair back comfortably against the
wall, fishing his quill toothpick from his waistcoat pocket. The two
bankers, Phelps and Elder, sat off in a corner behind the dinner table,
where they could finish their discussion of the new usury law and its
effect on chattel security loans. The real estate agent, an old man
with a smiling, hypocritical face, soon joined them. The coal-and-lumber
dealer and the cattle shipper sat on opposite sides of the hard
coal-burner, their feet on the nickelwork. Steavens took a book from
his pocket and began to read. The talk around him ranged through various
topics of local interest while the house was quieting down. When it
was clear that the members of the family were in bed the Grand Army man
hitched his shoulders and, untangling his long legs, caught his heels on
the rounds of his chair.

“S'pose there'll be a will, Phelps ?” he queried in his weak falsetto.

The banker laughed disagreeably and began trimming his nails with a
pearl-handled pocketknife.

“There'll scarcely be any need for one, will there ?” he queried in his
turn.

The restless Grand Army man shifted his position again, getting his
knees still nearer his chin. “Why, the ole man says Harve's done right
well lately,” he chirped.

The other banker spoke up. “I reckon he means by that Harve ain't asked
him to mortgage any more farms lately, so as he could go on with his
education.”

“Seems like my mind don't reach back to a time when Harve wasn't bein'
edycated,” tittered the Grand Army man.

There was a general chuckle. The minister took out his handkerchief and
blew his nose sonorously. Banker Phelps closed his knife with a snap.
“It's too bad the old man's sons didn't turn out better,” he remarked
with reflective authority. “They never hung together. He spent money
enough on Harve to stock a dozen cattle farms and he might as well have
poured it into Sand Creek. If Harve had stayed at home and helped nurse
what little they had, and gone into stock on the old man's bottom
farm, they might all have been well fixed. But the old man had to trust
everything to tenants and was cheated right and left.”

“Harve never could have handled stock none,” interposed the cattleman.
“He hadn't it in him to be sharp. Do you remember when he bought
Sander's mules for eight-year-olds, when everybody in town knew that
Sander's father-in-law give 'em to his wife for a wedding present
eighteen years before, an' they was full-grown mules then.”

Everyone chuckled, and the Grand Army man rubbed his knees with a spasm
of childish delight.

“Harve never was much account for anything practical, and he shore was
never fond of work,” began the coal-and-lumber dealer. “I mind the last
time he was home; the day he left, when the old man was out to the barn
helpin' his hand hitch up to take Harve to the train, and Cal Moots was
patchin' up the fence, Harve, he come out on the step and sings out, in
his ladylike voice: 'Cal Moots, Cal Moots! please come cord my trunk.'”

“That's Harve for you,” approved the Grand Army man gleefully. “I kin
hear him howlin' yet when he was a big feller in long pants and his
mother used to whale him with a rawhide in the barn for lettin' the
cows git foundered in the cornfield when he was drivin' 'em home from
pasture. He killed a cow of mine that-a-way onc't--a pure Jersey and the
best milker I had, an' the ole man had to put up for her. Harve, he was
watchin' the sun set acros't the marshes when the anamile got away; he
argued that sunset was oncommon fine.”

“Where the old man made his mistake was in sending the boy East to
school,” said Phelps, stroking his goatee and speaking in a deliberate,
judicial tone. “There was where he got his head full of traipsing to
Paris and all such folly. What Harve needed, of all people, was a course
in some first-class Kansas City business college.”

The letters were swimming before Steavens's eyes. Was it possible that
these men did not understand, that the palm on the coffin meant nothing
to them ? The very name of their town would have remained forever buried
in the postal guide had it not been now and again mentioned in the world
in connection with Harvey Merrick's. He remembered what his master had
said to him on the day of his death, after the congestion of both lungs
had shut off any probability of recovery, and the sculptor had asked
his pupil to send his body home. “It's not a pleasant place to be lying
while the world is moving and doing and bettering,” he had said with a
feeble smile, “but it rather seems as though we ought to go back to the
place we came from in the end. The townspeople will come in for a look
at me; and after they have had their say I shan't have much to fear from
the judgment of God. The wings of the Victory, in there”--with a weak
gesture toward his studio--“will not shelter me.”

The cattleman took up the comment. “Forty's young for a Merrick to cash
in; they usually hang on pretty well. Probably he helped it along with
whisky.”

“His mother's people were not long-lived, and Harvey never had a robust
constitution,” said the minister mildly. He would have liked to say
more. He had been the boy's Sunday-school teacher, and had been fond of
him; but he felt that he was not in a position to speak. His own sons
had turned out badly, and it was not a year since one of them had made
his last trip home in the express car, shot in a gambling house in the
Black Hills.

“Nevertheless, there is no disputin' that Harve frequently looked upon
the wine when it was red, also variegated, and it shore made an oncommon
fool of him,” moralized the cattleman.

Just then the door leading into the parlor rattled loudly, and everyone
started involuntarily, looking relieved when only Jim Laird came out.
His red face was convulsed with anger, and the Grand Army man ducked
his head when he saw the spark in his blue, bloodshot eye. They were all
afraid of Jim; he was a drunkard, but he could twist the law to suit his
client's needs as no other man in all western Kansas could do; and
there were many who tried. The lawyer closed the door gently behind him,
leaned back against it and folded his arms, cocking his head a little
to one side. When he assumed this attitude in the courtroom, ears were
always pricked up, as it usually foretold a flood of withering sarcasm.

“I've been with you gentlemen before,” he began in a dry, even tone,
“when you've sat by the coffins of boys born and raised in this town;
and, if I remember rightly, you were never any too well satisfied when
you checked them up. What's the matter, anyhow ? Why is it that reputable
young men are as scarce as millionaires in Sand City ? It might almost
seem to a stranger that there was some way something the matter with
your progressive town. Why did Ruben Sayer, the brightest young lawyer
you ever turned out, after he had come home from the university as
straight as a die, take to drinking and forge a check and shoot himself ?
Why did Bill Merrit's son die of the shakes in a saloon in Omaha ? Why
was Mr. Thomas's son, here, shot in a gambling house ? Why did young
Adams burn his mill to beat the insurance companies and go to the pen ?”

The lawyer paused and unfolded his arms, laying one clenched fist
quietly on the table. “I'll tell you why. Because you drummed
nothing but money and knavery into their ears from the time they wore
knickerbockers; because you carped away at them as you've been carping
here tonight, holding our friends Phelps and Elder up to them for their
models, as our grandfathers held up George Washington and John Adams.
But the boys, worse luck, were young and raw at the business you put
them to; and how could they match coppers with such artists as Phelps
and Elder ? You wanted them to be successful rascals; they were only
unsuccessful ones--that's all the difference. There was only one boy
ever raised in this borderland between ruffianism and civilization who
didn't come to grief, and you hated Harvey Merrick more for winning out
than you hated all the other boys who got under the wheels. Lord, Lord,
how you did hate him! Phelps, here, is fond of saying that he could buy
and sell us all out any time he's a mind to; but he knew Harve wouldn't
have given a tinker's damn for his bank and all his cattle farms put
together; and a lack of appreciation, that way, goes hard with Phelps.

“Old Nimrod, here, thinks Harve drank too much; and this from such as
Nimrod and me!”

“Brother Elder says Harve was too free with the old man's money--fell
short in filial consideration, maybe. Well, we can all remember the
very tone in which brother Elder swore his own father was a liar, in
the county court; and we all know that the old man came out of that
partnership with his son as bare as a sheared lamb. But maybe I'm
getting personal, and I'd better be driving ahead at what I want to
say.”

The lawyer paused a moment, squared his heavy shoulders, and went on:
“Harvey Merrick and I went to school together, back East. We were dead
in earnest, and we wanted you all to be proud of us some day. We
meant to be great men. Even I, and I haven't lost my sense of humor,
gentlemen, I meant to be a great man. I came back here to practice, and
I found you didn't in the least want me to be a great man. You wanted me
to be a shrewd lawyer--oh, yes! Our veteran here wanted me to get him
an increase of pension, because he had dyspepsia; Phelps wanted a new
county survey that would put the widow Wilson's little bottom farm
inside his south line; Elder wanted to lend money at 5 per cent a month
and get it collected; old Stark here wanted to wheedle old women up in
Vermont into investing their annuities in real estate mortgages that are
not worth the paper they are written on. Oh, you needed me hard enough,
and you'll go on needing me; and that's why I'm not afraid to plug the
truth home to you this once.

“Well, I came back here and became the damned shyster you wanted me
to be. You pretend to have some sort of respect for me; and yet you'll
stand up and throw mud at Harvey Merrick, whose soul you couldn't dirty
and whose hands you couldn't tie. Oh, you're a discriminating lot of
Christians! There have been times when the sight of Harvey's name in
some Eastern paper has made me hang my head like a whipped dog; and,
again, times when I liked to think of him off there in the world, away
from all this hog wallow, doing his great work and climbing the big,
clean upgrade he'd set for himself.

“And we ? Now that we've fought and lied and sweated and stolen, and
hated as only the disappointed strugglers in a bitter, dead little
Western town know how to do, what have we got to show for it ? Harvey
Merrick wouldn't have given one sunset over your marshes for all you've
got put together, and you know it. It's not for me to say why, in the
inscrutable wisdom of God, a genius should ever have been called from
this place of hatred and bitter waters; but I want this Boston man to
know that the drivel he's been hearing here tonight is the only
tribute any truly great man could ever have from such a lot of sick,
side-tracked, burnt-dog, land-poor sharks as the here-present financiers
of Sand City--upon which town may God have mercy!”

The lawyer thrust out his hand to Steavens as he passed him, caught up
his overcoat in the hall, and had left the house before the Grand Army
man had had time to lift his ducked head and crane his long neck about
at his fellows.


Next day Jim Laird was drunk and unable to attend the funeral services.
Steavens called twice at his office, but was compelled to start East
without seeing him. He had a presentiment that he would hear from him
again, and left his address on the lawyer's table; but if Laird found
it, he never acknowledged it. The thing in him that Harvey Merrick had
loved must have gone underground with Harvey Merrick's coffin; for it
never spoke again, and Jim got the cold he died of driving across the
Colorado mountains to defend one of Phelps's sons, who had got into
trouble out there by cutting government timber.





“A Death in the Desert”

Everett Hilgarde was conscious that the man in the seat across the
aisle was looking at him intently. He was a large, florid man, wore a
conspicuous diamond solitaire upon his third finger, and Everett judged
him to be a traveling salesman of some sort. He had the air of an
adaptable fellow who had been about the world and who could keep cool
and clean under almost any circumstances.

The “High Line Flyer,” as this train was derisively called among
railroad men, was jerking along through the hot afternoon over the
monotonous country between Holdridge and Cheyenne. Besides the blond
man and himself the only occupants of the car were two dusty,
bedraggled-looking girls who had been to the Exposition at Chicago,
and who were earnestly discussing the cost of their first trip out of
Colorado. The four uncomfortable passengers were covered with a sediment
of fine, yellow dust which clung to their hair and eyebrows like gold
powder. It blew up in clouds from the bleak, lifeless country through
which they passed, until they were one color with the sagebrush and
sandhills. The gray-and-yellow desert was varied only by occasional
ruins of deserted towns, and the little red boxes of station houses,
where the spindling trees and sickly vines in the bluegrass yards made
little green reserves fenced off in that confusing wilderness of sand.

As the slanting rays of the sun beat in stronger and stronger through
the car windows, the blond gentleman asked the ladies' permission to
remove his coat, and sat in his lavender striped shirt sleeves, with a
black silk handkerchief tucked carefully about his collar. He had seemed
interested in Everett since they had boarded the train at Holdridge, and
kept glancing at him curiously and then looking reflectively out of
the window, as though he were trying to recall something. But wherever
Everett went someone was almost sure to look at him with that curious
interest, and it had ceased to embarrass or annoy him. Presently the
stranger, seeming satisfied with his observation, leaned back in his
seat, half-closed his eyes, and began softly to whistle the “Spring
Song” from _Proserpine_, the cantata that a dozen years before had made
its young composer famous in a night. Everett had heard that air on
guitars in Old Mexico, on mandolins at college glees, on cottage organs
in New England hamlets, and only two weeks ago he had heard it played on
sleighbells at a variety theater in Denver. There was literally no way
of escaping his brother's precocity. Adriance could live on the other
side of the Atlantic, where his youthful indiscretions were forgotten in
his mature achievements, but his brother had never been able to outrun
_Proserpine_, and here he found it again in the Colorado sand hills. Not
that Everett was exactly ashamed of _Proserpine_; only a man of genius
could have written it, but it was the sort of thing that a man of genius
outgrows as soon as he can.

Everett unbent a trifle and smiled at his neighbor across the aisle.
Immediately the large man rose and, coming over, dropped into the seat
facing Hilgarde, extending his card.

“Dusty ride, isn't it ? I don't mind it myself; I'm used to it. Born and
bred in de briar patch, like Br'er Rabbit. I've been trying to place you
for a long time; I think I must have met you before.”

“Thank you,” said Everett, taking the card; “my name is Hilgarde. You've
probably met my brother, Adriance; people often mistake me for him.”

The traveling man brought his hand down upon his knee with such
vehemence that the solitaire blazed.

“So I was right after all, and if you're not Adriance Hilgarde, you're
his double. I thought I couldn't be mistaken. Seen him ? Well, I guess!
I never missed one of his recitals at the Auditorium, and he played
the piano score of _Proserpine_ through to us once at the Chicago Press
Club. I used to be on the _Commercial_ there before I began
to travel for the publishing department of the concern. So you're
Hilgarde's brother, and here I've run into you at the jumping-off place.
Sounds like a newspaper yarn, doesn't it ?”

The traveling man laughed and offered Everett a cigar, and plied him
with questions on the only subject that people ever seemed to care to
talk to Everett about. At length the salesman and the two girls alighted
at a Colorado way station, and Everett went on to Cheyenne alone.

The train pulled into Cheyenne at nine o'clock, late by a matter of four
hours or so; but no one seemed particularly concerned at its tardiness
except the station agent, who grumbled at being kept in the office
overtime on a summer night. When Everett alighted from the train he
walked down the platform and stopped at the track crossing, uncertain as
to what direction he should take to reach a hotel. A phaeton stood near
the crossing, and a woman held the reins. She was dressed in white, and
her figure was clearly silhouetted against the cushions, though it was
too dark to see her face. Everett had scarcely noticed her, when the
switch engine came puffing up from the opposite direction, and the
headlight threw a strong glare of light on his face. Suddenly the woman
in the phaeton uttered a low cry and dropped the reins. Everett started
forward and caught the horse's head, but the animal only lifted its
ears and whisked its tail in impatient surprise. The woman sat perfectly
still, her head sunk between her shoulders and her handkerchief pressed
to her face. Another woman came out of the depot and hurried toward the
phaeton, crying, “Katharine, dear, what is the matter ?”

Everett hesitated a moment in painful embarrassment, then lifted his
hat and passed on. He was accustomed to sudden recognitions in the most
impossible places, especially by women, but this cry out of the night
had shaken him.

While Everett was breakfasting the next morning, the headwaiter leaned
over his chair to murmur that there was a gentleman waiting to see him
in the parlor. Everett finished his coffee and went in the direction
indicated, where he found his visitor restlessly pacing the floor. His
whole manner betrayed a high degree of agitation, though his physique
was not that of a man whose nerves lie near the surface. He was
something below medium height, square-shouldered and solidly built. His
thick, closely cut hair was beginning to show gray about the ears, and
his bronzed face was heavily lined. His square brown hands were
locked behind him, and he held his shoulders like a man conscious of
responsibilities; yet, as he turned to greet Everett, there was an
incongruous diffidence in his address.

“Good morning, Mr. Hilgarde,” he said, extending his hand; “I found your
name on the hotel register. My name is Gaylord. I'm afraid my sister
startled you at the station last night, Mr. Hilgarde, and I've come
around to apologize.”

“Ah! The young lady in the phaeton ? I'm sure I didn't know whether I
had anything to do with her alarm or not. If I did, it is I who owe the
apology.”

The man colored a little under the dark brown of his face.

“Oh, it's nothing you could help, sir, I fully understand that. You see,
my sister used to be a pupil of your brother's, and it seems you favor
him; and when the switch engine threw a light on your face it startled
her.”

Everett wheeled about in his chair. “Oh! _Katharine_ Gaylord! Is it
possible! Now it's you who have given me a turn. Why, I used to know her
when I was a boy. What on earth--”

“Is she doing here ?” said Gaylord, grimly filling out the pause. “You've
got at the heart of the matter. You knew my sister had been in bad
health for a long time ?”

“No, I had never heard a word of that. The last I knew of her she was
singing in London. My brother and I correspond infrequently and seldom
get beyond family matters. I am deeply sorry to hear this. There are
more reasons why I am concerned than I can tell you.”

The lines in Charley Gaylord's brow relaxed a little.

“What I'm trying to say, Mr. Hilgarde, is that she wants to see you. I
hate to ask you, but she's so set on it. We live several miles out of
town, but my rig's below, and I can take you out anytime you can go.”

“I can go now, and it will give me real pleasure to do so,” said
Everett, quickly. “I'll get my hat and be with you in a moment.”

When he came downstairs Everett found a cart at the door, and Charley
Gaylord drew a long sigh of relief as he gathered up the reins and
settled back into his own element.

“You see, I think I'd better tell you something about my sister before
you see her, and I don't know just where to begin. She traveled
in Europe with your brother and his wife, and sang at a lot of his
concerts; but I don't know just how much you know about her.”

“Very little, except that my brother always thought her the most gifted
of his pupils, and that when I knew her she was very young and very
beautiful and turned my head sadly for a while.”

Everett saw that Gaylord's mind was quite engrossed by his grief. He was
wrought up to the point where his reserve and sense of proportion had
quite left him, and his trouble was the one vital thing in the world.
“That's the whole thing,” he went on, flicking his horses with the whip.

“She was a great woman, as you say, and she didn't come of a great
family. She had to fight her own way from the first. She got to Chicago,
and then to New York, and then to Europe, where she went up like
lightning, and got a taste for it all; and now she's dying here like a
rat in a hole, out of her own world, and she can't fall back into ours.
We've grown apart, some way--miles and miles apart--and I'm afraid she's
fearfully unhappy.”

“It's a very tragic story that you are telling me, Gaylord,” said
Everett. They were well out into the country now, spinning along over
the dusty plains of red grass, with the ragged-blue outline of the
mountains before them.

“Tragic!” cried Gaylord, starting up in his seat, “my God, man, nobody
will ever know how tragic. It's a tragedy I live with and eat with and
sleep with, until I've lost my grip on everything. You see she had made
a good bit of money, but she spent it all going to health resorts. It's
her lungs, you know. I've got money enough to send her anywhere, but the
doctors all say it's no use. She hasn't the ghost of a chance. It's just
getting through the days now. I had no notion she was half so bad before
she came to me. She just wrote that she was all run down. Now that she's
here, I think she'd be happier anywhere under the sun, but she won't
leave. She says it's easier to let go of life here, and that to go East
would be dying twice. There was a time when I was a brakeman with a run
out of Bird City, Iowa, and she was a little thing I could carry on my
shoulder, when I could get her everything on earth she wanted, and she
hadn't a wish my $80 a month didn't cover; and now, when I've got a
little property together, I can't buy her a night's sleep!”

Everett saw that, whatever Charley Gaylord's present status in the world
might be, he had brought the brakeman's heart up the ladder with him,
and the brakeman's frank avowal of sentiment. Presently Gaylord went on:

“You can understand how she has outgrown her family. We're all a pretty
common sort, railroaders from away back. My father was a conductor. He
died when we were kids. Maggie, my other sister, who lives with me, was
a telegraph operator here while I was getting my grip on things. We had
no education to speak of. I have to hire a stenographer because I can't
spell straight--the Almighty couldn't teach me to spell. The things that
make up life to Kate are all Greek to me, and there's scarcely a point
where we touch any more, except in our recollections of the old times
when we were all young and happy together, and Kate sang in a church
choir in Bird City. But I believe, Mr. Hilgarde, that if she can see
just one person like you, who knows about the things and people she's
interested in, it will give her about the only comfort she can have
now.”

The reins slackened in Charley Gaylord's hand as they drew up before a
showily painted house with many gables and a round tower. “Here we are,”
 he said, turning to Everett, “and I guess we understand each other.”

They were met at the door by a thin, colorless woman, whom Gaylord
introduced as “my sister, Maggie.” She asked her brother to show Mr.
Hilgarde into the music room, where Katharine wished to see him alone.

When Everett entered the music room he gave a little start of surprise,
feeling that he had stepped from the glaring Wyoming sunlight into some
New York studio that he had always known. He wondered which it was of
those countless studios, high up under the roofs, over banks and
shops and wholesale houses, that this room resembled, and he looked
incredulously out of the window at the gray plain that ended in the
great upheaval of the Rockies.

The haunting air of familiarity about the room perplexed him. Was it
a copy of some particular studio he knew, or was it merely the studio
atmosphere that seemed so individual and poignantly reminiscent here
in Wyoming ? He sat down in a reading chair and looked keenly about him.
Suddenly his eye fell upon a large photograph of his brother above the
piano. Then it all became clear to him: this was veritably his brother's
room. If it were not an exact copy of one of the many studios that
Adriance had fitted up in various parts of the world, wearying of them
and leaving almost before the renovator's varnish had dried, it was at
least in the same tone. In every detail Adriance's taste was so manifest
that the room seemed to exhale his personality.

Among the photographs on the wall there was one of Katharine Gaylord,
taken in the days when Everett had known her, and when the flash of her
eye or the flutter of her skirt was enough to set his boyish heart in a
tumult. Even now, he stood before the portrait with a certain degree
of embarrassment. It was the face of a woman already old in her first
youth, thoroughly sophisticated and a trifle hard, and it told of
what her brother had called her fight. The camaraderie of her frank,
confident eyes was qualified by the deep lines about her mouth and the
curve of the lips, which was both sad and cynical. Certainly she had
more good will than confidence toward the world, and the bravado of
her smile could not conceal the shadow of an unrest that was almost
discontent. The chief charm of the woman, as Everett had known her, lay
in her superb figure and in her eyes, which possessed a warm, lifegiving
quality like the sunlight; eyes which glowed with a sort of perpetual
_salutat_ to the world. Her head, Everett remembered as peculiarly
well-shaped and proudly poised. There had been always a little of the
imperatrix about her, and her pose in the photograph revived all his old
impressions of her unattachedness, of how absolutely and valiantly she
stood alone.

Everett was still standing before the picture, his hands behind him
and his head inclined, when he heard the door open. A very tall woman
advanced toward him, holding out her hand. As she started to speak, she
coughed slightly; then, laughing, said, in a low, rich voice, a trifle
husky: “You see I make the traditional Camille entrance--with the cough.
How good of you to come, Mr. Hilgarde.”

Everett was acutely conscious that while addressing him she was not
looking at him at all, and, as he assured her of his pleasure in coming,
he was glad to have an opportunity to collect himself. He had not
reckoned upon the ravages of a long illness. The long, loose folds
of her white gown had been especially designed to conceal the sharp
outlines of her emaciated body, but the stamp of her disease was
there; simple and ugly and obtrusive, a pitiless fact that could not be
disguised or evaded. The splendid shoulders were stooped, there was a
swaying unevenness in her gait, her arms seemed disproportionately
long, and her hands were transparently white and cold to the touch. The
changes in her face were less obvious; the proud carriage of the head,
the warm, clear eyes, even the delicate flush of color in her cheeks,
all defiantly remained, though they were all in a lower key--older,
sadder, softer.

She sat down upon the divan and began nervously to arrange the pillows.
“I know I'm not an inspiring object to look upon, but you must be quite
frank and sensible about that and get used to it at once, for we've no
time to lose. And if I'm a trifle irritable you won't mind ?--for I'm
more than usually nervous.”

“Don't bother with me this morning, if you are tired,” urged Everett. “I
can come quite as well tomorrow.”

“Gracious, no!” she protested, with a flash of that quick, keen humor
that he remembered as a part of her. “It's solitude that I'm tired to
death of--solitude and the wrong kind of people. You see, the minister,
not content with reading the prayers for the sick, called on me this
morning. He happened to be riding by on his bicycle and felt it his
duty to stop. Of course, he disapproves of my profession, and I think
he takes it for granted that I have a dark past. The funniest feature
of his conversation is that he is always excusing my own vocation to
me--condoning it, you know--and trying to patch up my peace with my
conscience by suggesting possible noble uses for what he kindly calls my
talent.”

Everett laughed. “Oh! I'm afraid I'm not the person to call after such
a serious gentleman--I can't sustain the situation. At my best I don't
reach higher than low comedy. Have you decided to which one of the noble
uses you will devote yourself ?”

Katharine lifted her hands in a gesture of renunciation and exclaimed:
“I'm not equal to any of them, not even the least noble. I didn't study
that method.”

She laughed and went on nervously: “The parson's not so bad. His English
never offends me, and he has read Gibbon's _Decline and Fall_, all five
volumes, and that's something. Then, he has been to New York, and that's
a great deal. But how we are losing time! Do tell me about New York;
Charley says you're just on from there. How does it look and taste and
smell just now ? I think a whiff of the Jersey ferry would be as flagons
of cod-liver oil to me. Who conspicuously walks the Rialto now, and what
does he or she wear ? Are the trees still green in Madison Square, or
have they grown brown and dusty ? Does the chaste Diana on the Garden
Theatre still keep her vestal vows through all the exasperating changes
of weather ? Who has your brother's old studio now, and what misguided
aspirants practice their scales in the rookeries about Carnegie Hall ?
What do people go to see at the theaters, and what do they eat and drink
there in the world nowadays ? You see, I'm homesick for it all, from the
Battery to Riverside. Oh, let me die in Harlem!” She was interrupted
by a violent attack of coughing, and Everett, embarrassed by her
discomfort, plunged into gossip about the professional people he had met
in town during the summer and the musical outlook for the winter. He was
diagraming with his pencil, on the back of an old envelope he found in
his pocket, some new mechanical device to be used at the Metropolitan in
the production of the _Rheingold_, when he became conscious that she was
looking at him intently, and that he was talking to the four walls.

Katharine was lying back among the pillows, watching him through
half-closed eyes, as a painter looks at a picture. He finished his
explanation vaguely enough and put the envelope back in his pocket. As
he did so she said, quietly: “How wonderfully like Adriance you are!”
 and he felt as though a crisis of some sort had been met and tided over.

He laughed, looking up at her with a touch of pride in his eyes that
made them seem quite boyish. “Yes, isn't it absurd ? It's almost as
awkward as looking like Napoleon--but, after all, there are some
advantages. It has made some of his friends like me, and I hope it will
make you.”

Katharine smiled and gave him a quick, meaning glance from under her
lashes. “Oh, it did that long ago. What a haughty, reserved youth you
were then, and how you used to stare at people and then blush and look
cross if they paid you back in your own coin. Do you remember that night
when you took me home from a rehearsal and scarcely spoke a word to me ?”

“It was the silence of admiration,” protested Everett, “very crude and
boyish, but very sincere and not a little painful. Perhaps you suspected
something of the sort ? I remember you saw fit to be very grown-up and
worldly.

“I believe I suspected a pose; the one that college boys usually affect
with singers--'an earthen vessel in love with a star,' you know. But it
rather surprised me in you, for you must have seen a good deal of your
brother's pupils. Or had you an omnivorous capacity, and elasticity that
always met the occasion ?”

“Don't ask a man to confess the follies of his youth,” said Everett,
smiling a little sadly; “I am sensitive about some of them even now. But
I was not so sophisticated as you imagined. I saw my brother's pupils
come and go, but that was about all. Sometimes I was called on to play
accompaniments, or to fill out a vacancy at a rehearsal, or to order a
carriage for an infuriated soprano who had thrown up her part. But they
never spent any time on me, unless it was to notice the resemblance you
speak of.”

“Yes”, observed Katharine, thoughtfully, “I noticed it then, too; but it
has grown as you have grown older. That is rather strange, when you have
lived such different lives. It's not merely an ordinary family likeness
of feature, you know, but a sort of interchangeable individuality;
the suggestion of the other man's personality in your face like an air
transposed to another key. But I'm not attempting to define it; it's
beyond me; something altogether unusual and a trifle--well, uncanny,”
 she finished, laughing.

“I remember,” Everett said seriously, twirling the pencil between his
fingers and looking, as he sat with his head thrown back, out under the
red window blind which was raised just a little, and as it swung back
and forth in the wind revealed the glaring panorama of the desert--a
blinding stretch of yellow, flat as the sea in dead calm, splotched here
and there with deep purple shadows; and, beyond, the ragged-blue outline
of the mountains and the peaks of snow, white as the white clouds--“I
remember, when I was a little fellow I used to be very sensitive about
it. I don't think it exactly displeased me, or that I would have had it
otherwise if I could, but it seemed to me like a birthmark, or something
not to be lightly spoken of. People were naturally always fonder of
Ad than of me, and I used to feel the chill of reflected light pretty
often. It came into even my relations with my mother. Ad went abroad to
study when he was absurdly young, you know, and mother was all broken
up over it. She did her whole duty by each of us, but it was sort of
generally understood among us that she'd have made burnt offerings of us
all for Ad any day. I was a little fellow then, and when she sat alone
on the porch in the summer dusk she used sometimes to call me to her and
turn my face up in the light that streamed out through the shutters and
kiss me, and then I always knew she was thinking of Adriance.”

“Poor little chap,” said Katharine, and her tone was a trifle huskier
than usual. “How fond people have always been of Adriance! Now tell me
the latest news of him. I haven't heard, except through the press, for
a year or more. He was in Algeria then, in the valley of the Chelif,
riding horseback night and day in an Arabian costume, and in his
usual enthusiastic fashion he had quite made up his mind to adopt the
Mohammedan faith and become as nearly an Arab as possible. How many
countries and faiths has he adopted, I wonder ? Probably he was playing
Arab to himself all the time. I remember he was a sixteenth-century duke
in Florence once for weeks together.”

“Oh, that's Adriance,” chuckled Everett. “He is himself barely long
enough to write checks and be measured for his clothes. I didn't hear
from him while he was an Arab; I missed that.”

“He was writing an Algerian suite for the piano then; it must be in
the publisher's hands by this time. I have been too ill to answer his
letter, and have lost touch with him.”

Everett drew a letter from his pocket. “This came about a month ago.
It's chiefly about his new opera, which is to be brought out in London
next winter. Read it at your leisure.”

“I think I shall keep it as a hostage, so that I may be sure you will
come again. Now I want you to play for me. Whatever you like; but if
there is anything new in the world, in mercy let me hear it. For nine
months I have heard nothing but 'The Baggage Coach Ahead' and 'She Is My
Baby's Mother.'”

He sat down at the piano, and Katharine sat near him, absorbed in his
remarkable physical likeness to his brother and trying to discover in
just what it consisted. She told herself that it was very much as though
a sculptor's finished work had been rudely copied in wood. He was of
a larger build than Adriance, and his shoulders were broad and heavy,
while those of his brother were slender and rather girlish. His face was
of the same oval mold, but it was gray and darkened about the mouth by
continual shaving. His eyes were of the same inconstant April color,
but they were reflective and rather dull; while Adriance's were always
points of highlight, and always meaning another thing than the thing
they meant yesterday. But it was hard to see why this earnest man should
so continually suggest that lyric, youthful face that was as gay as his
was grave. For Adriance, though he was ten years the elder, and though
his hair was streaked with silver, had the face of a boy of twenty, so
mobile that it told his thoughts before he could put them into words. A
contralto, famous for the extravagance of her vocal methods and of her
affections, had once said to him that the shepherd boys who sang in the
Vale of Tempe must certainly have looked like young Hilgarde; and the
comparison had been appropriated by a hundred shyer women who preferred
to quote.


As Everett sat smoking on the veranda of the Inter-Ocean House that
night, he was a victim to random recollections. His infatuation for
Katharine Gaylord, visionary as it was, had been the most serious of his
boyish love affairs, and had long disturbed his bachelor dreams. He was
painfully timid in everything relating to the emotions, and his hurt
had withdrawn him from the society of women. The fact that it was all so
done and dead and far behind him, and that the woman had lived her
life out since then, gave him an oppressive sense of age and loss. He
bethought himself of something he had read about “sitting by the hearth
and remembering the faces of women without desire,” and felt himself an
octogenarian.

He remembered how bitter and morose he had grown during his stay at his
brother's studio when Katharine Gaylord was working there, and how he
had wounded Adriance on the night of his last concert in New York. He
had sat there in the box while his brother and Katharine were called
back again and again after the last number, watching the roses go up
over the footlights until they were stacked half as high as the piano,
brooding, in his sullen boy's heart, upon the pride those two felt in
each other's work--spurring each other to their best and beautifully
contending in song. The footlights had seemed a hard, glittering line
drawn sharply between their life and his; a circle of flame set about
those splendid children of genius. He walked back to his hotel alone
and sat in his window staring out on Madison Square until long after
midnight, resolving to beat no more at doors that he could never enter
and realizing more keenly than ever before how far this glorious world
of beautiful creations lay from the paths of men like himself. He told
himself that he had in common with this woman only the baser uses of
life.

Everett's week in Cheyenne stretched to three, and he saw no prospect of
release except through the thing he dreaded. The bright, windy days of
the Wyoming autumn passed swiftly. Letters and telegrams came urging
him to hasten his trip to the coast, but he resolutely postponed his
business engagements. The mornings he spent on one of Charley Gaylord's
ponies, or fishing in the mountains, and in the evenings he sat in his
room writing letters or reading. In the afternoon he was usually at his
post of duty. Destiny, he reflected, seems to have very positive notions
about the sort of parts we are fitted to play. The scene changes and the
compensation varies, but in the end we usually find that we have played
the same class of business from first to last. Everett had been a
stopgap all his life. He remembered going through a looking glass
labyrinth when he was a boy and trying gallery after gallery, only at
every turn to bump his nose against his own face--which, indeed, was not
his own, but his brother's. No matter what his mission, east or west,
by land or sea, he was sure to find himself employed in his brother's
business, one of the tributary lives which helped to swell the shining
current of Adriance Hilgarde's. It was not the first time that his duty
had been to comfort, as best he could, one of the broken things his
brother's imperious speed had cast aside and forgotten. He made no
attempt to analyze the situation or to state it in exact terms; but
he felt Katharine Gaylord's need for him, and he accepted it as a
commission from his brother to help this woman to die. Day by day he
felt her demands on him grow more imperious, her need for him grow more
acute and positive; and day by day he felt that in his peculiar relation
to her his own individuality played a smaller and smaller part. His
power to minister to her comfort, he saw, lay solely in his link with
his brother's life. He understood all that his physical resemblance
meant to her. He knew that she sat by him always watching for some
common trick of gesture, some familiar play of expression, some illusion
of light and shadow, in which he should seem wholly Adriance. He knew
that she lived upon this and that her disease fed upon it; that it sent
shudders of remembrance through her and that in the exhaustion which
followed this turmoil of her dying senses, she slept deep and sweet and
dreamed of youth and art and days in a certain old Florentine garden,
and not of bitterness and death.

The question which most perplexed him was, “How much shall I know ? How
much does she wish me to know ?” A few days after his first meeting with
Katharine Gaylord, he had cabled his brother to write her. He had merely
said that she was mortally ill; he could depend on Adriance to say the
right thing--that was a part of his gift. Adriance always said not
only the right thing, but the opportune, graceful, exquisite thing. His
phrases took the color of the moment and the then-present condition, so
that they never savored of perfunctory compliment or frequent usage. He
always caught the lyric essence of the moment, the poetic suggestion
of every situation. Moreover, he usually did the right thing, the
opportune, graceful, exquisite thing--except, when he did very cruel
things--bent upon making people happy when their existence touched his,
just as he insisted that his material environment should be beautiful;
lavishing upon those near him all the warmth and radiance of his rich
nature, all the homage of the poet and troubadour, and, when they were
no longer near, forgetting--for that also was a part of Adriance's gift.

Three weeks after Everett had sent his cable, when he made his daily
call at the gaily painted ranch house, he found Katharine laughing like
a schoolgirl. “Have you ever thought,” she said, as he entered the
music room, “how much these seances of ours are like Heine's 'Florentine
Nights,' except that I don't give you an opportunity to monopolize the
conversation as Heine did ?” She held his hand longer than usual, as
she greeted him, and looked searchingly up into his face. “You are the
kindest man living; the kindest,” she added, softly.

Everett's gray face colored faintly as he drew his hand away, for
he felt that this time she was looking at him and not at a whimsical
caricature of his brother. “Why, what have I done now ?” he asked,
lamely. “I can't remember having sent you any stale candy or champagne
since yesterday.”

She drew a letter with a foreign postmark from between the leaves of a
book and held it out, smiling. “You got him to write it. Don't say you
didn't, for it came direct, you see, and the last address I gave him was
a place in Florida. This deed shall be remembered of you when I am with
the just in Paradise. But one thing you did not ask him to do, for you
didn't know about it. He has sent me his latest work, the new sonata,
the most ambitious thing he has ever done, and you are to play it for me
directly, though it looks horribly intricate. But first for the letter;
I think you would better read it aloud to me.”

Everett sat down in a low chair facing the window seat in which she
reclined with a barricade of pillows behind her. He opened the letter,
his lashes half-veiling his kind eyes, and saw to his satisfaction that
it was a long one--wonderfully tactful and tender, even for Adriance,
who was tender with his valet and his stable boy, with his old gondolier
and the beggar-women who prayed to the saints for him.

The letter was from Granada, written in the Alhambra, as he sat by the
fountain of the Patio di Lindaraxa. The air was heavy, with the warm
fragrance of the South and full of the sound of splashing, running
water, as it had been in a certain old garden in Florence, long ago.
The sky was one great turquoise, heated until it glowed. The wonderful
Moorish arches threw graceful blue shadows all about him. He had
sketched an outline of them on the margin of his notepaper. The
subtleties of Arabic decoration had cast an unholy spell over him,
and the brutal exaggerations of Gothic art were a bad dream, easily
forgotten. The Alhambra itself had, from the first, seemed perfectly
familiar to him, and he knew that he must have trod that court,
sleek and brown and obsequious, centuries before Ferdinand rode into
Andalusia. The letter was full of confidences about his work, and
delicate allusions to their old happy days of study and comradeship, and
of her own work, still so warmly remembered and appreciatively discussed
everywhere he went.

As Everett folded the letter he felt that Adriance had divined the thing
needed and had risen to it in his own wonderful way. The letter was
consistently egotistical and seemed to him even a trifle patronizing,
yet it was just what she had wanted. A strong realization of his
brother's charm and intensity and power came over him; he felt the
breath of that whirlwind of flame in which Adriance passed, consuming
all in his path, and himself even more resolutely than he consumed
others. Then he looked down at this white, burnt-out brand that lay
before him. “Like him, isn't it ?” she said, quietly.

“I think I can scarcely answer his letter, but when you see him next you
can do that for me. I want you to tell him many things for me, yet they
can all be summed up in this: I want him to grow wholly into his best
and greatest self, even at the cost of the dear boyishness that is half
his charm to you and me. Do you understand me ?”

“I know perfectly well what you mean,” answered Everett, thoughtfully.
“I have often felt so about him myself. And yet it's difficult to
prescribe for those fellows; so little makes, so little mars.”

Katharine raised herself upon her elbow, and her face flushed with
feverish earnestness. “Ah, but it is the waste of himself that I mean;
his lashing himself out on stupid and uncomprehending people until they
take him at their own estimate. He can kindle marble, strike fire from
putty, but is it worth what it costs him ?”

“Come, come,” expostulated Everett, alarmed at her excitement. “Where is
the new sonata ? Let him speak for himself.”

He sat down at the piano and began playing the first movement, which was
indeed the voice of Adriance, his proper speech. The sonata was the most
ambitious work he had done up to that time and marked the transition
from his purely lyric vein to a deeper and nobler style. Everett played
intelligently and with that sympathetic comprehension which seems
peculiar to a certain lovable class of men who never accomplish anything
in particular. When he had finished he turned to Katharine.

“How he has grown!” she cried. “What the three last years have done for
him! He used to write only the tragedies of passion; but this is the
tragedy of the soul, the shadow coexistent with the soul. This is the
tragedy of effort and failure, the thing Keats called hell. This is my
tragedy, as I lie here spent by the racecourse, listening to the feet of
the runners as they pass me. Ah, God! The swift feet of the runners!”

She turned her face away and covered it with her straining hands.
Everett crossed over to her quickly and knelt beside her. In all
the days he had known her she had never before, beyond an occasional
ironical jest, given voice to the bitterness of her own defeat. Her
courage had become a point of pride with him, and to see it going
sickened him.

“Don't do it,” he gasped. “I can't stand it, I really can't, I feel it
too much. We mustn't speak of that; it's too tragic and too vast.”

When she turned her face back to him there was a ghost of the old,
brave, cynical smile on it, more bitter than the tears she could not
shed. “No, I won't be so ungenerous; I will save that for the watches
of the night when I have no better company. Now you may mix me another
drink of some sort. Formerly, when it was not _if_ I should ever sing
Brunnhilde, but quite simply when I _should_ sing Brunnhilde, I was
always starving myself and thinking what I might drink and what I might
not. But broken music boxes may drink whatsoever they list, and no
one cares whether they lose their figure. Run over that theme at the
beginning again. That, at least, is not new. It was running in his head
when we were in Venice years ago, and he used to drum it on his glass at
the dinner table. He had just begun to work it out when the late autumn
came on, and the paleness of the Adriatic oppressed him, and he decided
to go to Florence for the winter, and lost touch with the theme during
his illness. Do you remember those frightful days ? All the people who
have loved him are not strong enough to save him from himself! When
I got word from Florence that he had been ill I was in Nice filling
a concert engagement. His wife was hurrying to him from Paris, but I
reached him first. I arrived at dusk, in a terrific storm. They had
taken an old palace there for the winter, and I found him in the
library--a long, dark room full of old Latin books and heavy furniture
and bronzes. He was sitting by a wood fire at one end of the room,
looking, oh, so worn and pale!--as he always does when he is ill, you
know. Ah, it is so good that you _do_ know! Even his red smoking jacket
lent no color to his face. His first words were not to tell me how ill
he had been, but that that morning he had been well enough to put the
last strokes to the score of his _Souvenirs d'Automne_. He was as I
most like to remember him: so calm and happy and tired; not gay, as he
usually is, but just contented and tired with that heavenly tiredness
that comes after a good work done at last. Outside, the rain poured
down in torrents, and the wind moaned for the pain of all the world and
sobbed in the branches of the shivering olives and about the walls of
that desolated old palace. How that night comes back to me! There were
no lights in the room, only the wood fire which glowed upon the hard
features of the bronze Dante, like the reflection of purgatorial flames,
and threw long black shadows about us; beyond us it scarcely penetrated
the gloom at all, Adriance sat staring at the fire with the weariness
of all his life in his eyes, and of all the other lives that must aspire
and suffer to make up one such life as his. Somehow the wind with all
its world-pain had got into the room, and the cold rain was in our eyes,
and the wave came up in both of us at once--that awful, vague, universal
pain, that cold fear of life and death and God and hope--and we were
like two clinging together on a spar in midocean after the shipwreck of
everything. Then we heard the front door open with a great gust of wind
that shook even the walls, and the servants came running with lights,
announcing that Madam had returned, _'and in the book we read no more
that night.'_”

She gave the old line with a certain bitter humor, and with the hard,
bright smile in which of old she had wrapped her weakness as in a
glittering garment. That ironical smile, worn like a mask through so
many years, had gradually changed even the lines of her face completely,
and when she looked in the mirror she saw not herself, but the scathing
critic, the amused observer and satirist of herself. Everett dropped
his head upon his hand and sat looking at the rug. “How much you have
cared!” he said.

“Ah, yes, I cared,” she replied, closing her eyes with a long-drawn sigh
of relief; and lying perfectly still, she went on: “You can't imagine
what a comfort it is to have you know how I cared, what a relief it is
to be able to tell it to someone. I used to want to shriek it out to the
world in the long nights when I could not sleep. It seemed to me that I
could not die with it. It demanded some sort of expression. And now that
you know, you would scarcely believe how much less sharp the anguish of
it is.”

Everett continued to look helplessly at the floor. “I was not sure how
much you wanted me to know,” he said.

“Oh, I intended you should know from the first time I looked into your
face, when you came that day with Charley. I flatter myself that I have
been able to conceal it when I chose, though I suppose women always
think that. The more observing ones may have seen, but discerning people
are usually discreet and often kind, for we usually bleed a little
before we begin to discern. But I wanted you to know; you are so like
him that it is almost like telling him himself. At least, I feel now
that he will know some day, and then I will be quite sacred from his
compassion, for we none of us dare pity the dead. Since it was what my
life has chiefly meant, I should like him to know. On the whole I am not
ashamed of it. I have fought a good fight.”

“And has he never known at all ?” asked Everett, in a thick voice.

“Oh! Never at all in the way that you mean. Of course, he is accustomed
to looking into the eyes of women and finding love there; when he
doesn't find it there he thinks he must have been guilty of some
discourtesy and is miserable about it. He has a genuine fondness for
everyone who is not stupid or gloomy, or old or preternaturally ugly.
Granted youth and cheerfulness, and a moderate amount of wit and some
tact, and Adriance will always be glad to see you coming around the
corner. I shared with the rest; shared the smiles and the gallantries
and the droll little sermons. It was quite like a Sunday-school picnic;
we wore our best clothes and a smile and took our turns. It was his
kindness that was hardest. I have pretty well used my life up at
standing punishment.”

“Don't; you'll make me hate him,” groaned Everett.

Katharine laughed and began to play nervously with her fan. “It wasn't
in the slightest degree his fault; that is the most grotesque part of
it. Why, it had really begun before I ever met him. I fought my way to
him, and I drank my doom greedily enough.”

Everett rose and stood hesitating. “I think I must go. You ought to be
quiet, and I don't think I can hear any more just now.”

She put out her hand and took his playfully. “You've put in three weeks
at this sort of thing, haven't you ? Well, it may never be to your glory
in this world, perhaps, but it's been the mercy of heaven to me, and it
ought to square accounts for a much worse life than yours will ever be.”

Everett knelt beside her, saying, brokenly: “I stayed because I wanted
to be with you, that's all. I have never cared about other women since I
met you in New York when I was a lad. You are a part of my destiny, and
I could not leave you if I would.”

She put her hands on his shoulders and shook her head. “No, no; don't
tell me that. I have seen enough of tragedy, God knows. Don't show me
any more just as the curtain is going down. No, no, it was only a boy's
fancy, and your divine pity and my utter pitiableness have recalled it
for a moment. One does not love the dying, dear friend. If some fancy of
that sort had been left over from boyhood, this would rid you of it,
and that were well. Now go, and you will come again tomorrow, as long as
there are tomorrows, will you not ?” She took his hand with a smile that
lifted the mask from her soul, that was both courage and despair, and
full of infinite loyalty and tenderness, as she said softly:

     For ever and for ever, farewell, Cassius;
     If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
     If not, why then, this parting was well made.

The courage in her eyes was like the clear light of a star to him as he
went out.

On the night of Adriance Hilgarde's opening concert in Paris Everett sat
by the bed in the ranch house in Wyoming, watching over the last battle
that we have with the flesh before we are done with it and free of it
forever. At times it seemed that the serene soul of her must have left
already and found some refuge from the storm, and only the tenacious
animal life were left to do battle with death. She labored under a
delusion at once pitiful and merciful, thinking that she was in the
Pullman on her way to New York, going back to her life and her work.
When she aroused from her stupor it was only to ask the porter to waken
her half an hour out of Jersey City, or to remonstrate with him about
the delays and the roughness of the road. At midnight Everett and the
nurse were left alone with her. Poor Charley Gaylord had lain down on a
couch outside the door. Everett sat looking at the sputtering night lamp
until it made his eyes ache. His head dropped forward on the foot of the
bed, and he sank into a heavy, distressful slumber. He was dreaming of
Adriance's concert in Paris, and of Adriance, the troubadour, smiling
and debonair, with his boyish face and the touch of silver gray in
his hair. He heard the applause and he saw the roses going up over the
footlights until they were stacked half as high as the piano, and the
petals fell and scattered, making crimson splotches on the floor. Down
this crimson pathway came Adriance with his youthful step, leading his
prima donna by the hand; a dark woman this time, with Spanish eyes.

The nurse touched him on the shoulder; he started and awoke. She
screened the lamp with her hand. Everett saw that Katharine was awake
and conscious, and struggling a little. He lifted her gently on his arm
and began to fan her. She laid her hands lightly on his hair and looked
into his face with eyes that seemed never to have wept or doubted. “Ah,
dear Adriance, dear, dear,” she whispered.

Everett went to call her brother, but when they came back the madness of
art was over for Katharine.

Two days later Everett was pacing the station siding, waiting for the
westbound train. Charley Gaylord walked beside him, but the two men had
nothing to say to each other. Everett's bags were piled on the truck,
and his step was hurried and his eyes were full of impatience, as he
gazed again and again up the track, watching for the train. Gaylord's
impatience was not less than his own; these two, who had grown so close,
had now become painful and impossible to each other, and longed for the
wrench of farewell.

As the train pulled in Everett wrung Gaylord's hand among the crowd of
alighting passengers. The people of a German opera company, en route
to the coast, rushed by them in frantic haste to snatch their breakfast
during the stop. Everett heard an exclamation in a broad German dialect,
and a massive woman whose figure persistently escaped from her stays in
the most improbable places rushed up to him, her blond hair disordered
by the wind, and glowing with joyful surprise she caught his coat sleeve
with her tightly gloved hands.

“_Herr Gott_, Adriance, _lieber Freund_,” she cried, emotionally.

Everett quickly withdrew his arm and lifted his hat, blushing. “Pardon
me, madam, but I see that you have mistaken me for Adriance Hilgarde.
I am his brother,” he said quietly, and turning from the crestfallen
singer, he hurried into the car.




The Garden Lodge

When Caroline Noble's friends learned that Raymond d'Esquerre was to
spend a month at her place on the Sound before he sailed to fill his
engagement for the London opera season, they considered it another
striking instance of the perversity of things. That the month was May,
and the most mild and florescent of all the blue-and-white Mays the
middle coast had known in years, but added to their sense of wrong.
D'Esquerre, they learned, was ensconced in the lodge in the apple
orchard, just beyond Caroline's glorious garden, and report went that
at almost any hour the sound of the tenor's voice and of Caroline's
crashing accompaniment could be heard floating through the open windows,
out among the snowy apple boughs. The Sound, steel-blue and dotted with
white sails, was splendidly seen from the windows of the lodge. The
garden to the left and the orchard to the right had never been so
riotous with spring, and had burst into impassioned bloom, as if to
accommodate Caroline, though she was certainly the last woman to whom
the witchery of Freya could be attributed; the last woman, as her
friends affirmed, to at all adequately appreciate and make the most of
such a setting for the great tenor.

Of course, they admitted, Caroline was musical--well, she ought to
be!--but in that, as in everything, she was paramountly cool-headed,
slow of impulse, and disgustingly practical; in that, as in everything
else, she had herself so provokingly well in hand. Of course, it would
be she, always mistress of herself in any situation, she, who would
never be lifted one inch from the ground by it, and who would go on
superintending her gardeners and workmen as usual--it would be she who
got him. Perhaps some of them suspected that this was exactly why she
did get him, and it but nettled them the more.

Caroline's coolness, her capableness, her general success, especially
exasperated people because they felt that, for the most part, she
had made herself what she was; that she had cold-bloodedly set about
complying with the demands of life and making her position comfortable
and masterful. That was why, everyone said, she had married Howard
Noble. Women who did not get through life so well as Caroline, who could
not make such good terms either with fortune or their husbands, who did
not find their health so unfailingly good, or hold their looks so well,
or manage their children so easily, or give such distinction to all they
did, were fond of stamping Caroline as a materialist, and called her
hard.

The impression of cold calculation, of having a definite policy, which
Caroline gave, was far from a false one; but there was this to be said
for her--that there were extenuating circumstances which her friends
could not know.

If Caroline held determinedly to the middle course, if she was apt to
regard with distrust everything which inclined toward extravagance, it
was not because she was unacquainted with other standards than her own,
or had never seen another side of life. She had grown up in Brooklyn,
in a shabby little house under the vacillating administration of her
father, a music teacher who usually neglected his duties to write
orchestral compositions for which the world seemed to have no especial
need. His spirit was warped by bitter vindictiveness and puerile
self-commiseration, and he spent his days in scorn of the labor that
brought him bread and in pitiful devotion to the labor that brought him
only disappointment, writing interminable scores which demanded of the
orchestra everything under heaven except melody.

It was not a cheerful home for a girl to grow up in. The mother, who
idolized her husband as the music lord of the future, was left to a
lifelong battle with broom and dustpan, to neverending conciliatory
overtures to the butcher and grocer, to the making of her own gowns
and of Caroline's, and to the delicate task of mollifying Auguste's
neglected pupils.

The son, Heinrich, a painter, Caroline's only brother, had inherited all
his father's vindictive sensitiveness without his capacity for slavish
application. His little studio on the third floor had been much
frequented by young men as unsuccessful as himself, who met there to
give themselves over to contemptuous derision of this or that artist
whose industry and stupidity had won him recognition. Heinrich, when he
worked at all, did newspaper sketches at twenty-five dollars a week. He
was too indolent and vacillating to set himself seriously to his art,
too irascible and poignantly self-conscious to make a living, too much
addicted to lying late in bed, to the incontinent reading of poetry, and
to the use of chloral to be anything very positive except painful. At
twenty-six he shot himself in a frenzy, and the whole wretched affair
had effectually shattered his mother's health and brought on the decline
of which she died. Caroline had been fond of him, but she felt a certain
relief when he no longer wandered about the little house, commenting
ironically upon its shabbiness, a Turkish cap on his head and a
cigarette hanging from between his long, tremulous fingers.

After her mother's death Caroline assumed the management of that
bankrupt establishment. The funeral expenses were unpaid, and Auguste's
pupils had been frightened away by the shock of successive disasters and
the general atmosphere of wretchedness that pervaded the house. Auguste
himself was writing a symphonic poem, Icarus, dedicated to the memory
of his son. Caroline was barely twenty when she was called upon to face
this tangle of difficulties, but she reviewed the situation candidly.
The house had served its time at the shrine of idealism; vague,
distressing, unsatisfied yearnings had brought it low enough. Her
mother, thirty years before, had eloped and left Germany with her music
teacher, to give herself over to lifelong, drudging bondage at the
kitchen range. Ever since Caroline could remember, the law in the house
had been a sort of mystic worship of things distant, intangible and
unattainable. The family had lived in successive ebullitions of generous
enthusiasm, in talk of masters and masterpieces, only to come down to
the cold facts in the case; to boiled mutton and to the necessity of
turning the dining-room carpet. All these emotional pyrotechnics had
ended in petty jealousies, in neglected duties, and in cowardly fear of
the little grocer on the corner.

From her childhood she had hated it, that humiliating and uncertain
existence, with its glib tongue and empty pockets, its poetic ideals and
sordid realities, its indolence and poverty tricked out in paper roses.
Even as a little girl, when vague dreams beset her, when she wanted to
lie late in bed and commune with visions, or to leap and sing because
the sooty little trees along the street were putting out their first
pale leaves in the sunshine, she would clench her hands and go to
help her mother sponge the spots from her father's waistcoat or press
Heinrich's trousers. Her mother never permitted the slightest question
concerning anything Auguste or Heinrich saw fit to do, but from the
time Caroline could reason at all she could not help thinking that many
things went wrong at home. She knew, for example, that her father's
pupils ought not to be kept waiting half an hour while he discussed
Schopenhauer with some bearded socialist over a dish of herrings and a
spotted tablecloth. She knew that Heinrich ought not to give a dinner on
Heine's birthday, when the laundress had not been paid for a month and
when he frequently had to ask his mother for carfare. Certainly Caroline
had served her apprenticeship to idealism and to all the embarrassing
inconsistencies which it sometimes entails, and she decided to deny
herself this diffuse, ineffectual answer to the sharp questions of life.

When she came into the control of herself and the house she refused
to proceed any further with her musical education. Her father, who had
intended to make a concert pianist of her, set this down as another
item in his long list of disappointments and his grievances against
the world. She was young and pretty, and she had worn turned gowns and
soiled gloves and improvised hats all her life. She wanted the luxury of
being like other people, of being honest from her hat to her boots, of
having nothing to hide, not even in the matter of stockings, and she was
willing to work for it. She rented a little studio away from that house
of misfortune and began to give lessons. She managed well and was the
sort of girl people liked to help. The bills were paid and Auguste went
on composing, growing indignant only when she refused to insist that
her pupils should study his compositions for the piano. She began to
get engagements in New York to play accompaniments at song recitals.
She dressed well, made herself agreeable, and gave herself a chance.
She never permitted herself to look further than a step ahead, and set
herself with all the strength of her will to see things as they are and
meet them squarely in the broad day. There were two things she feared
even more than poverty: the part of one that sets up an idol and the
part of one that bows down and worships it.

When Caroline was twenty-four she married Howard Noble, then a widower
of forty, who had been for ten years a power in Wall Street. Then, for
the first time, she had paused to take breath. It took a substantialness
as unquestionable as his; his money, his position, his energy, the big
vigor of his robust person, to satisfy her that she was entirely safe.
Then she relaxed a little, feeling that there was a barrier to be
counted upon between her and that world of visions and quagmires and
failure.

Caroline had been married for six years when Raymond d'Esquerre came
to stay with them. He came chiefly because Caroline was what she was;
because he, too, felt occasionally the need of getting out of Klingsor's
garden, of dropping down somewhere for a time near a quiet nature, a
cool head, a strong hand. The hours he had spent in the garden lodge
were hours of such concentrated study as, in his fevered life, he seldom
got in anywhere. She had, as he told Noble, a fine appreciation of the
seriousness of work.

One evening two weeks after d'Esquerre had sailed, Caroline was in the
library giving her husband an account of the work she had laid out for
the gardeners. She superintended the care of the grounds herself. Her
garden, indeed, had become quite a part of her; a sort of beautiful
adjunct, like gowns or jewels. It was a famous spot, and Noble was very
proud of it.

“What do you think, Caroline, of having the garden lodge torn down and
putting a new summer house there at the end of the arbor; a big rustic
affair where you could have tea served in midsummer ?” he asked.

“The lodge ?” repeated Caroline looking at him quickly. “Why, that seems
almost a shame, doesn't it, after d'Esquerre has used it ?”

Noble put down his book with a smile of amusement.

“Are you going to be sentimental about it ? Why, I'd sacrifice the whole
place to see that come to pass. But I don't believe you could do it for
an hour together.”

“I don't believe so, either,” said his wife, smiling.

Noble took up his book again and Caroline went into the music room to
practice. She was not ready to have the lodge torn down. She had gone
there for a quiet hour every day during the two weeks since d'Esquerre
had left them. It was the sheerest sentiment she had ever permitted
herself. She was ashamed of it, but she was childishly unwilling to let
it go.

Caroline went to bed soon after her husband, but she was not able to
sleep. The night was close and warm, presaging storm. The wind had
fallen, and the water slept, fixed and motionless as the sand. She rose
and thrust her feet into slippers and, putting a dressing gown over
her shoulders, opened the door of her husband's room; he was sleeping
soundly. She went into the hall and down the stairs; then, leaving the
house through a side door, stepped into the vine-covered arbor that led
to the garden lodge. The scent of the June roses was heavy in the still
air, and the stones that paved the path felt pleasantly cool through the
thin soles of her slippers. Heat-lightning flashed continuously from the
bank of clouds that had gathered over the sea, but the shore was flooded
with moonlight and, beyond, the rim of the Sound lay smooth and shining.
Caroline had the key of the lodge, and the door creaked as she opened
it. She stepped into the long, low room radiant with the moonlight which
streamed through the bow window and lay in a silvery pool along the
waxed floor. Even that part of the room which lay in the shadow was
vaguely illuminated; the piano, the tall candlesticks, the picture
frames and white casts standing out as clearly in the half-light as
did the sycamores and black poplars of the garden against the still,
expectant night sky. Caroline sat down to think it all over. She had
come here to do just that every day of the two weeks since d'Esquerre's
departure, but, far from ever having reached a conclusion, she had
succeeded only in losing her way in a maze of memories--sometimes
bewilderingly confused, sometimes too acutely distinct--where there was
neither path, nor clue, nor any hope of finality. She had, she realized,
defeated a lifelong regimen; completely confounded herself by falling
unaware and incontinently into that luxury of reverie which, even as
a little girl, she had so determinedly denied herself, she had been
developing with alarming celerity that part of one which sets up an idol
and that part of one which bows down and worships it.

It was a mistake, she felt, ever to have asked d'Esquerre to come
at all. She had an angry feeling that she had done it rather in
self-defiance, to rid herself finally of that instinctive fear of him
which had always troubled and perplexed her. She knew that she had
reckoned with herself before he came; but she had been equal to so much
that she had never really doubted she would be equal to this. She had
come to believe, indeed, almost arrogantly in her own malleability and
endurance; she had done so much with herself that she had come to think
that there was nothing which she could not do; like swimmers, overbold,
who reckon upon their strength and their power to hoard it, forgetting
the ever-changing moods of their adversary, the sea.

And d'Esquerre was a man to reckon with. Caroline did not deceive
herself now upon that score. She admitted it humbly enough, and since
she had said good-by to him she had not been free for a moment from
the sense of his formidable power. It formed the undercurrent of her
consciousness; whatever she might be doing or thinking, it went on,
involuntarily, like her breathing, sometimes welling up until suddenly
she found herself suffocating. There was a moment of this tonight,
and Caroline rose and stood shuddering, looking about her in the blue
duskiness of the silent room. She had not been here at night before, and
the spirit of the place seemed more troubled and insistent than ever it
had in the quiet of the afternoons. Caroline brushed her hair back from
her damp forehead and went over to the bow window. After raising it
she sat down upon the low seat. Leaning her head against the sill, and
loosening her nightgown at the throat, she half-closed her eyes
and looked off into the troubled night, watching the play of the
heat-lightning upon the massing clouds between the pointed tops of the
poplars.

Yes, she knew, she knew well enough, of what absurdities this spell was
woven; she mocked, even while she winced. His power, she knew, lay not
so much in anything that he actually had--though he had so much--or
in anything that he actually was, but in what he suggested, in what he
seemed picturesque enough to have or be and that was just anything
that one chose to believe or to desire. His appeal was all the more
persuasive and alluring in that it was to the imagination alone, in that
it was as indefinite and impersonal as those cults of idealism which
so have their way with women. What he had was that, in his mere
personality, he quickened and in a measure gratified that something
without which--to women--life is no better than sawdust, and to the
desire for which most of their mistakes and tragedies and astonishingly
poor bargains are due.

D'Esquerre had become the center of a movement, and the Metropolitan
had become the temple of a cult. When he could be induced to cross the
Atlantic, the opera season in New York was successful; when he
could not, the management lost money; so much everyone knew. It was
understood, too, that his superb art had disproportionately little to do
with his peculiar position. Women swayed the balance this way or that;
the opera, the orchestra, even his own glorious art, achieved at such a
cost, were but the accessories of himself; like the scenery and costumes
and even the soprano, they all went to produce atmosphere, were the mere
mechanics of the beautiful illusion.

Caroline understood all this; tonight was not the first time that she
had put it to herself so. She had seen the same feeling in other people,
watched for it in her friends, studied it in the house night after night
when he sang, candidly putting herself among a thousand others.

D'Esquerre's arrival in the early winter was the signal for a feminine
hegira toward New York. On the nights when he sang women flocked to
the Metropolitan from mansions and hotels, from typewriter desks,
schoolrooms, shops, and fitting rooms. They were of all conditions
and complexions. Women of the world who accepted him knowingly as they
sometimes took champagne for its agreeable effect; sisters of charity
and overworked shopgirls, who received him devoutly; withered women who
had taken doctorate degrees and who worshipped furtively through prism
spectacles; business women and women of affairs, the Amazons who dwelt
afar from men in the stony fastnesses of apartment houses. They all
entered into the same romance; dreamed, in terms as various as the hues
of fantasy, the same dream; drew the same quick breath when he stepped
upon the stage, and, at his exit, felt the same dull pain of shouldering
the pack again.

There were the maimed, even; those who came on crutches, who were pitted
by smallpox or grotesquely painted by cruel birth stains. These, too,
entered with him into enchantment. Stout matrons became slender girls
again; worn spinsters felt their cheeks flush with the tenderness of
their lost youth. Young and old, however hideous, however fair, they
yielded up their heat--whether quick or latent--sat hungering for the
mystic bread wherewith he fed them at this eucharist of sentiment.

Sometimes, when the house was crowded from the orchestra to the last row
of the gallery, when the air was charged with this ecstasy of fancy,
he himself was the victim of the burning reflection of his power. They
acted upon him in turn; he felt their fervent and despairing appeal to
him; it stirred him as the spring drives the sap up into an old tree;
he, too, burst into bloom. For the moment he, too, believed again,
desired again, he knew not what, but something.

But it was not in these exalted moments that Caroline had learned to
fear him most. It was in the quiet, tired reserve, the dullness, even,
that kept him company between these outbursts that she found that
exhausting drain upon her sympathies which was the very pith
and substance of their alliance. It was the tacit admission of
disappointment under all this glamour of success--the helplessness of
the enchanter to at all enchant himself--that awoke in her an illogical,
womanish desire to in some way compensate, to make it up to him.

She had observed drastically to herself that it was her eighteenth year
he awoke in her--those hard years she had spent in turning gowns and
placating tradesmen, and which she had never had time to live. After
all, she reflected, it was better to allow one's self a little youth--to
dance a little at the carnival and to live these things when they are
natural and lovely, not to have them coming back on one and demanding
arrears when they are humiliating and impossible. She went over tonight
all the catalogue of her self-deprivations; recalled how, in the light
of her father's example, she had even refused to humor her innocent
taste for improvising at the piano; how, when she began to teach, after
her mother's death, she had struck out one little indulgence after
another, reducing her life to a relentless routine, unvarying as
clockwork. It seemed to her that ever since d'Esquerre first came into
the house she had been haunted by an imploring little girlish ghost that
followed her about, wringing its hands and entreating for an hour of
life.

The storm had held off unconscionably long; the air within the lodge was
stifling, and without the garden waited, breathless. Everything seemed
pervaded by a poignant distress; the hush of feverish, intolerable
expectation. The still earth, the heavy flowers, even the growing
darkness, breathed the exhaustion of protracted waiting. Caroline felt
that she ought to go; that it was wrong to stay; that the hour and the
place were as treacherous as her own reflections. She rose and began to
pace the floor, stepping softly, as though in fear of awakening someone,
her figure, in its thin drapery, diaphanously vague and white. Still
unable to shake off the obsession of the intense stillness, she sat down
at the piano and began to run over the first act of the _Walkure_, the
last of his roles they had practiced together; playing listlessly and
absently at first, but with gradually increasing seriousness. Perhaps it
was the still heat of the summer night, perhaps it was the heavy odors
from the garden that came in through the open windows; but as she played
there grew and grew the feeling that he was there, beside her, standing
in his accustomed place. In the duet at the end of the first act she
heard him clearly: _“Thou art the Spring for which I sighed in Winter's
cold embraces.”_ Once as he sang it, he had put his arm about her,
his one hand under her heart, while with the other he took her right
from the keyboard, holding her as he always held _Sieglinde_ when he
drew her toward the window. She had been wonderfully the mistress of
herself at the time; neither repellent nor acquiescent. She remembered
that she had rather exulted, then, in her self-control--which he had
seemed to take for granted, though there was perhaps the whisper of a
question from the hand under her heart. _“Thou art the Spring for which
I sighed in Winter's cold embraces.”_ Caroline lifted her hands quickly
from the keyboard, and she bowed her head in them, sobbing.

The storm broke and the rain beat in, spattering her nightdress until
she rose and lowered the windows. She dropped upon the couch and began
fighting over again the battles of other days, while the ghosts of the
slain rose as from a sowing of dragon's teeth, The shadows of things,
always so scorned and flouted, bore down upon her merciless and
triumphant. It was not enough; this happy, useful, well-ordered life
was not enough. It did not satisfy, it was not even real. No, the other
things, the shadows--they were the realities. Her father, poor Heinrich,
even her mother, who had been able to sustain her poor romance and keep
her little illusions amid the tasks of a scullion, were nearer happiness
than she. Her sure foundation was but made ground, after all, and the
people in Klingsor's garden were more fortunate, however barren the
sands from which they conjured their paradise.

The lodge was still and silent; her fit of weeping over, Caroline
made no sound, and within the room, as without in the garden, was the
blackness of storm. Only now and then a flash of lightning showed a
woman's slender figure rigid on the couch, her face buried in her hands.

Toward morning, when the occasional rumbling of thunder was heard no
more and the beat of the raindrops upon the orchard leaves was steadier,
she fell asleep and did not waken until the first red streaks of dawn
shone through the twisted boughs of the apple trees. There was a moment
between world and world, when, neither asleep nor awake, she felt her
dream grow thin, melting away from her, felt the warmth under her heart
growing cold. Something seemed to slip from the clinging hold of her
arms, and she groaned protestingly through her parted lips, following
it a little way with fluttering hands. Then her eyes opened wide and she
sprang up and sat holding dizzily to the cushions of the couch, staring
down at her bare, cold feet, at her laboring breast, rising and falling
under her open nightdress.

The dream was gone, but the feverish reality of it still pervaded her
and she held it as the vibrating string holds a tone. In the last hour
the shadows had had their way with Caroline. They had shown her the
nothingness of time and space, of system and discipline, of closed doors
and broad waters. Shuddering, she thought of the Arabian fairy tale in
which the genie brought the princess of China to the sleeping prince
of Damascus and carried her through the air back to her palace at dawn.
Caroline closed her eyes and dropped her elbows weakly upon her knees,
her shoulders sinking together. The horror was that it had not come
from without, but from within. The dream was no blind chance; it was the
expression of something she had kept so close a prisoner that she had
never seen it herself, it was the wail from the donjon deeps when the
watch slept. Only as the outcome of such a night of sorcery could the
thing have been loosed to straighten its limbs and measure itself with
her; so heavy were the chains upon it, so many a fathom deep, it was
crushed down into darkness. The fact that d'Esquerre happened to be on
the other side of the world meant nothing; had he been here, beside her,
it could scarcely have hurt her self-respect so much. As it was, she was
without even the extenuation of an outer impulse, and she could scarcely
have despised herself more had she come to him here in the night three
weeks ago and thrown herself down upon the stone slab at the door there.

Caroline rose unsteadily and crept guiltily from the lodge and along the
path under the arbor, terrified lest the servants should be stirring,
trembling with the chill air, while the wet shrubbery, brushing against
her, drenched her nightdress until it clung about her limbs.

At breakfast her husband looked across the table at her with concern.
“It seems to me that you are looking rather fagged, Caroline. It was a
beastly night to sleep. Why don't you go up to the mountains until this
hot weather is over ? By the way, were you in earnest about letting the
lodge stand ?”

Caroline laughed quietly. “No, I find I was not very serious. I haven't
sentiment enough to forego a summer house. Will you tell Baker to come
tomorrow to talk it over with me ? If we are to have a house party, I
should like to put him to work on it at once.”

Noble gave her a glance, half-humorous, half-vexed. “Do you know I am
rather disappointed ?” he said. “I had almost hoped that, just for once,
you know, you would be a little bit foolish.”

“Not now that I've slept over it,” replied Caroline, and they both rose
from the table, laughing.




The Marriage of Phaedra

The sequence of events was such that MacMaster did not make his
pilgrimage to Hugh Treffinger's studio until three years after that
painter's death. MacMaster was himself a painter, an American of the
Gallicized type, who spent his winters in New York, his summers in
Paris, and no inconsiderable amount of time on the broad waters between.
He had often contemplated stopping in London on one of his return trips
in the late autumn, but he had always deferred leaving Paris until the
prick of necessity drove him home by the quickest and shortest route.

Treffinger was a comparatively young man at the time of his death, and
there had seemed no occasion for haste until haste was of no avail.
Then, possibly, though there had been some correspondence between them,
MacMaster felt certain qualms about meeting in the flesh a man who in
the flesh was so diversely reported. His intercourse with Treffinger's
work had been so deep and satisfying, so apart from other appreciations,
that he rather dreaded a critical juncture of any sort. He had always
felt himself singularly inept in personal relations, and in this case he
had avoided the issue until it was no longer to be feared or hoped for.
There still remained, however, Treffinger's great unfinished picture,
the _Marriage of Phaedra_, which had never left his studio, and of which
MacMaster's friends had now and again brought report that it was the
painter's most characteristic production.

The young man arrived in London in the evening, and the next morning
went out to Kensington to find Treffinger's studio. It lay in one of the
perplexing bystreets off Holland Road, and the number he found on a
door set in a high garden wall, the top of which was covered with broken
green glass and over which a budding lilac bush nodded. Treffinger's
plate was still there, and a card requesting visitors to ring for the
attendant. In response to MacMaster's ring, the door was opened by a
cleanly built little man, clad in a shooting jacket and trousers that
had been made for an ampler figure. He had a fresh complexion, eyes of
that common uncertain shade of gray, and was closely shaven except for
the incipient muttonchops on his ruddy cheeks. He bore himself in
a manner strikingly capable, and there was a sort of trimness and
alertness about him, despite the too-generous shoulders of his coat. In
one hand he held a bulldog pipe, and in the other a copy of _Sporting
Life_. While MacMaster was explaining the purpose of his call he noticed
that the man surveyed him critically, though not impertinently. He was
admitted into a little tank of a lodge made of whitewashed stone, the
back door and windows opening upon a garden. A visitor's book and a pile
of catalogues lay on a deal table, together with a bottle of ink and
some rusty pens. The wall was ornamented with photographs and colored
prints of racing favorites.

“The studio is h'only open to the public on Saturdays and Sundays,”
 explained the man--he referred to himself as “Jymes”--“but of course we
make exceptions in the case of pynters. Lydy Elling Treffinger 'erself
is on the Continent, but Sir 'Ugh's orders was that pynters was to 'ave
the run of the place.” He selected a key from his pocket and threw open
the door into the studio which, like the lodge, was built against the
wall of the garden.

MacMaster entered a long, narrow room, built of smoothed planks, painted
a light green; cold and damp even on that fine May morning. The room was
utterly bare of furniture--unless a stepladder, a model throne, and a
rack laden with large leather portfolios could be accounted such--and
was windowless, without other openings than the door and the skylight,
under which hung the unfinished picture itself. MacMaster had never
seen so many of Treffinger's paintings together. He knew the painter
had married a woman with money and had been able to keep such of
his pictures as he wished. These, with all of his replicas and
studies, he had left as a sort of common legacy to the younger men of
the school he had originated.

As soon as he was left alone MacMaster sat down on the edge of the model
throne before the unfinished picture. Here indeed was what he had come
for; it rather paralyzed his receptivity for the moment, but gradually
the thing found its way to him.

At one o'clock he was standing before the collection of studies done for
_Boccaccio's Garden_ when he heard a voice at his elbow.

“Pardon, sir, but I was just about to lock up and go to lunch. Are
you lookin' for the figure study of Boccaccio 'imself ?” James queried
respectfully. “Lydy Elling Treffinger give it to Mr. Rossiter to take
down to Oxford for some lectures he's been agiving there.”

“Did he never paint out his studies, then ?” asked MacMaster with
perplexity. “Here are two completed ones for this picture. Why did he
keep them ?”

“I don't know as I could say as to that, sir,” replied James, smiling
indulgently, “but that was 'is way. That is to say, 'e pynted out very
frequent, but 'e always made two studies to stand; one in watercolors
and one in oils, before 'e went at the final picture--to say nothink
of all the pose studies 'e made in pencil before he begun on the
composition proper at all. He was that particular. You see, 'e wasn't so
keen for the final effect as for the proper pyntin' of 'is pictures. 'E
used to say they ought to be well made, the same as any other h'article
of trade. I can lay my 'and on the pose studies for you, sir.” He
rummaged in one of the portfolios and produced half a dozen drawings,
“These three,” he continued, “was discarded; these two was the pose he
finally accepted; this one without alteration, as it were.”

“That's in Paris, as I remember,” James continued reflectively. “It went
with the _Saint Cecilia_ into the Baron H---'s collection. Could you
tell me, sir, 'as 'e it still ? I don't like to lose account of them, but
some 'as changed 'ands since Sir 'Ugh's death.”

“H---'s collection is still intact, I believe,” replied MacMaster. “You
were with Treffinger long ?”

“From my boyhood, sir,” replied James with gravity. “I was a stable boy
when 'e took me.”

“You were his man, then ?”

“That's it, sir. Nobody else ever done anything around the studio.
I always mixed 'is colors and 'e taught me to do a share of the
varnishin'; 'e said as 'ow there wasn't a 'ouse in England as could
do it proper. You ayn't looked at the _Marriage_ yet, sir ?” he asked
abruptly, glancing doubtfully at MacMaster, and indicating with his
thumb the picture under the north light.

“Not very closely. I prefer to begin with something simpler; that's
rather appalling, at first glance,” replied MacMaster.

“Well may you say that, sir,” said James warmly. “That one regular
killed Sir 'Ugh; it regular broke 'im up, and nothink will ever convince
me as 'ow it didn't bring on 'is second stroke.”

When MacMaster walked back to High Street to take his bus his mind was
divided between two exultant convictions. He felt that he had not
only found Treffinger's greatest picture, but that, in James, he had
discovered a kind of cryptic index to the painter's personality--a clue
which, if tactfully followed, might lead to much.

Several days after his first visit to the studio, MacMaster wrote to
Lady Mary Percy, telling her that he would be in London for some time
and asking her if he might call. Lady Mary was an only sister of Lady
Ellen Treffinger, the painter's widow, and MacMaster had known her
during one winter he spent at Nice. He had known her, indeed, very well,
and Lady Mary, who was astonishingly frank and communicative upon
all subjects, had been no less so upon the matter of her sister's
unfortunate marriage.

In her reply to his note Lady Mary named an afternoon when she would be
alone. She was as good as her word, and when MacMaster arrived he
found the drawing room empty. Lady Mary entered shortly after he was
announced. She was a tall woman, thin and stiffly jointed, and her body
stood out under the folds of her gown with the rigor of cast iron.
This rather metallic suggestion was further carried out in her heavily
knuckled hands, her stiff gray hair, and her long, bold-featured face,
which was saved from freakishness only by her alert eyes.

“Really,” said Lady Mary, taking a seat beside him and giving him a sort
of military inspection through her nose glasses, “really, I had begun to
fear that I had lost you altogether. It's four years since I saw you
at Nice, isn't it ? I was in Paris last winter, but I heard nothing from
you.”

“I was in New York then.”

“It occurred to me that you might be. And why are you in London ?”

“Can you ask ?” replied MacMaster gallantly.

Lady Mary smiled ironically. “But for what else, incidentally ?”

“Well, incidentally, I came to see Treffinger's studio and his
unfinished picture. Since I've been here, I've decided to stay the
summer. I'm even thinking of attempting to do a biography of him.”

“So that is what brought you to London ?”

“Not exactly. I had really no intention of anything so serious when I
came. It's his last picture, I fancy, that has rather thrust it upon me.
The notion has settled down on me like a thing destined.”

“You'll not be offended if I question the clemency of such a destiny,”
 remarked Lady Mary dryly. “Isn't there rather a surplus of books on that
subject already ?”

“Such as they are. Oh, I've read them all”--here MacMaster faced Lady
Mary triumphantly. “He has quite escaped your amiable critics,” he
added, smiling.

“I know well enough what you think, and I daresay we are not much on
art,” said Lady Mary with tolerant good humor. “We leave that to peoples
who have no physique. Treffinger made a stir for a time, but it
seems that we are not capable of a sustained appreciation of such
extraordinary methods. In the end we go back to the pictures we find
agreeable and unperplexing. He was regarded as an experiment, I fancy;
and now it seems that he was rather an unsuccessful one. If you've come
to us in a missionary spirit, we'll tolerate you politely, but we'll
laugh in our sleeve, I warn you.”

“That really doesn't daunt me, Lady Mary,” declared MacMaster blandly.
“As I told you, I'm a man with a mission.”

Lady Mary laughed her hoarse, baritone laugh. “Bravo! And you've come to
me for inspiration for your panegyric ?”

MacMaster smiled with some embarrassment. “Not altogether for that
purpose. But I want to consult you, Lady Mary, about the advisability
of troubling Lady Ellen Treffinger in the matter. It seems scarcely
legitimate to go on without asking her to give some sort of grace to my
proceedings, yet I feared the whole subject might be painful to her. I
shall rely wholly upon your discretion.”

“I think she would prefer to be consulted,” replied Lady Mary
judicially. “I can't understand how she endures to have the wretched
affair continually raked up, but she does. She seems to feel a sort of
moral responsibility. Ellen has always been singularly conscientious
about this matter, insofar as her light goes,--which rather puzzles me,
as hers is not exactly a magnanimous nature. She is certainly trying to
do what she believes to be the right thing. I shall write to her, and
you can see her when she returns from Italy.”

“I want very much to meet her. She is, I hope, quite recovered in every
way,” queried MacMaster, hesitatingly.

“No, I can't say that she is. She has remained in much the same
condition she sank to before his death. He trampled over pretty much
whatever there was in her, I fancy. Women don't recover from wounds of
that sort--at least, not women of Ellen's grain. They go on bleeding
inwardly.”

“You, at any rate, have not grown more reconciled,” MacMaster ventured.

“Oh I give him his dues. He was a colorist, I grant you; but that is
a vague and unsatisfactory quality to marry to; Lady Ellen Treffinger
found it so.”

“But, my dear Lady Mary,” expostulated MacMaster, “and just repress me
if I'm becoming too personal--but it must, in the first place, have been
a marriage of choice on her part as well as on his.”

Lady Mary poised her glasses on her large forefinger and assumed an
attitude suggestive of the clinical lecture room as she replied. “Ellen,
my dear boy, is an essentially romantic person. She is quiet about it,
but she runs deep. I never knew how deep until I came against her on the
issue of that marriage. She was always discontented as a girl; she found
things dull and prosaic, and the ardor of his courtship was agreeable
to her. He met her during her first season in town. She is handsome, and
there were plenty of other men, but I grant you your scowling brigand
was the most picturesque of the lot. In his courtship, as in everything
else, he was theatrical to the point of being ridiculous, but Ellen's
sense of humor is not her strongest quality. He had the charm of
celebrity, the air of a man who could storm his way through anything
to get what he wanted. That sort of vehemence is particularly effective
with women like Ellen, who can be warmed only by reflected heat, and she
couldn't at all stand out against it. He convinced her of his necessity;
and that done, all's done.”

“I can't help thinking that, even on such a basis, the marriage should
have turned out better,” MacMaster remarked reflectively.

“The marriage,” Lady Mary continued with a shrug, “was made on the basis
of a mutual misunderstanding. Ellen, in the nature of the case, believed
that she was doing something quite out of the ordinary in accepting him,
and expected concessions which, apparently, it never occurred to him to
make. After his marriage he relapsed into his old habits of incessant
work, broken by violent and often brutal relaxations. He insulted her
friends and foisted his own upon her--many of them well calculated to
arouse aversion in any well-bred girl. He had Ghillini constantly at the
house--a homeless vagabond, whose conversation was impossible. I don't
say, mind you, that he had not grievances on his side. He had probably
overrated the girl's possibilities, and he let her see that he was
disappointed in her. Only a large and generous nature could have borne
with him, and Ellen's is not that. She could not at all understand that
odious strain of plebeian pride which plumes itself upon not having
risen above its sources.”

As MacMaster drove back to his hotel he reflected that Lady Mary Percy
had probably had good cause for dissatisfaction with her brother-in-law.
Treffinger was, indeed, the last man who should have married into
the Percy family. The son of a small tobacconist, he had grown up a
sign-painter's apprentice; idle, lawless, and practically letterless
until he had drifted into the night classes of the Albert League, where
Ghillini sometimes lectured. From the moment he came under the eye and
influence of that erratic Italian, then a political exile, his life
had swerved sharply from its old channel. This man had been at once
incentive and guide, friend and master, to his pupil. He had taken the
raw clay out of the London streets and molded it anew. Seemingly he had
divined at once where the boy's possibilities lay, and had thrown aside
every canon of orthodox instruction in the training of him. Under
him Treffinger acquired his superficial, yet facile, knowledge of the
classics; had steeped himself in the monkish Latin and medieval romances
which later gave his work so naive and remote a quality. That was the
beginning of the wattle fences, the cobble pave, the brown roof beams,
the cunningly wrought fabrics that gave to his pictures such a richness
of decorative effect.

As he had told Lady Mary Percy, MacMaster had found the imperative
inspiration of his purpose in Treffinger's unfinished picture,
the _Marriage of Phaedra_. He had always believed that the key to
Treffinger's individuality lay in his singular education; in the _Roman
de la Rose_, in Boccaccio, and Amadis, those works which had literally
transcribed themselves upon the blank soul of the London street boy,
and through which he had been born into the world of spiritual things.
Treffinger had been a man who lived after his imagination; and his mind,
his ideals and, as MacMaster believed, even his personal ethics, had to
the last been colored by the trend of his early training. There was in
him alike the freshness and spontaneity, the frank brutality and the
religious mysticism, which lay well back of the fifteenth century. In
the _Marriage of Phaedra_ MacMaster found the ultimate expression of
this spirit, the final word as to Treffinger's point of view.

As in all Treffinger's classical subjects, the conception was wholly
medieval. This Phaedra, just turning from her husband and maidens to
greet her husband's son, giving him her first fearsome glance from
under her half-lifted veil, was no daughter of Minos. The daughter of
_heathenesse_ and the early church she was; doomed to torturing visions
and scourgings, and the wrangling of soul with flesh. The venerable
Theseus might have been victorious Charlemagne, and Phaedra's maidens
belonged rather in the train of Blanche of Castile than at the Cretan
court. In the earlier studies Hippolytus had been done with a more pagan
suggestion; but in each successive drawing the glorious figure had been
deflowered of something of its serene unconsciousness, until, in the
canvas under the skylight, he appeared a very Christian knight.
This male figure, and the face of Phaedra, painted with such magical
preservation of tone under the heavy shadow of the veil, were plainly
Treffinger's highest achievements of craftsmanship. By what labor he had
reached the seemingly inevitable composition of the picture--with its
twenty figures, its plenitude of light and air, its restful distances
seen through white porticoes--countless studies bore witness.

From James's attitude toward the picture MacMaster could well conjecture
what the painter's had been. This picture was always uppermost in
James's mind; its custodianship formed, in his eyes, his occupation.
He was manifestly apprehensive when visitors--not many came
nowadays--lingered near it. “It was the _Marriage_ as killed 'im,” he
would often say, “and for the matter 'o that, it did like to 'av been
the death of all of us.”

By the end of his second week in London MacMaster had begun the notes
for his study of Hugh Treffinger and his work. When his researches
led him occasionally to visit the studios of Treffinger's friends and
erstwhile disciples, he found their Treffinger manner fading as the
ring of Treffinger's personality died out in them. One by one they were
stealing back into the fold of national British art; the hand that
had wound them up was still. MacMaster despaired of them and confined
himself more and more exclusively to the studio, to such of Treffinger's
letters as were available--they were for the most part singularly
negative and colorless--and to his interrogation of Treffinger's man.

He could not himself have traced the successive steps by which he was
gradually admitted into James's confidence. Certainly most of his adroit
strategies to that end failed humiliatingly, and whatever it was that
built up an understanding between them must have been instinctive and
intuitive on both sides. When at last James became anecdotal, personal,
there was that in every word he let fall which put breath and blood into
MacMaster's book. James had so long been steeped in that penetrating
personality that he fairly exuded it. Many of his very phrases,
mannerisms, and opinions were impressions that he had taken on like wet
plaster in his daily contact with Treffinger. Inwardly he was lined
with cast-off epitheliums, as outwardly he was clad in the painter's
discarded coats. If the painter's letters were formal and perfunctory,
if his expressions to his friends had been extravagant, contradictory,
and often apparently insincere--still, MacMaster felt himself not
entirely without authentic sources. It was James who possessed
Treffinger's legend; it was with James that he had laid aside his pose.
Only in his studio, alone, and face to face with his work, as it seemed,
had the man invariably been himself. James had known him in the one
attitude in which he was entirely honest; their relation had fallen
well within the painter's only indubitable integrity. James's report
of Treffinger was distorted by no hallucination of artistic insight,
colored by no interpretation of his own. He merely held what he
had heard and seen; his mind was a sort of camera obscura. His very
limitations made him the more literal and minutely accurate.

One morning, when MacMaster was seated before the _Marriage of Phaedra_,
James entered on his usual round of dusting.

“I've 'eard from Lydy Elling by the post, sir,” he remarked, “an' she's
give h'orders to 'ave the 'ouse put in readiness. I doubt she'll be 'ere
by Thursday or Friday next.”

“She spends most of her time abroad ?” queried MacMaster; on the subject
of Lady Treffinger James consistently maintained a very delicate
reserve.

“Well, you could 'ardly say she does that, sir. She finds the 'ouse a
bit dull, I daresay, so durin' the season she stops mostly with Lydy
Mary Percy, at Grosvenor Square. Lydy Mary's a h'only sister.” After a
few moments he continued, speaking in jerks governed by the rigor of his
dusting: “H'only this morning I come upon this scarfpin,” exhibiting a
very striking instance of that article, “an' I recalled as 'ow Sir 'Ugh
give it me when 'e was acourting of Lydy Elling. Blowed if I ever see a
man go in for a 'oman like 'im! 'E was that gone, sir. 'E never went in
on anythink so 'ard before nor since, till 'e went in on the _Marriage_
there--though 'e mostly went in on things pretty keen; 'ad the measles
when 'e was thirty, strong as cholera, an' come close to dyin' of 'em.
'E wasn't strong for Lydy Elling's set; they was a bit too stiff for
'im. A free an' easy gentleman, 'e was; 'e liked 'is dinner with a few
friends an' them jolly, but 'e wasn't much on what you might call big
affairs. But once 'e went in for Lydy Elling 'e broke 'imself to new
paces; He give away 'is rings an' pins, an' the tylor's man an' the
'aberdasher's man was at 'is rooms continual. 'E got 'imself put up
for a club in Piccadilly; 'e starved 'imself thin, an' worrited 'imself
white, an' ironed 'imself out, an' drawed 'imself tight as a bow string.
It was a good job 'e come a winner, or I don't know w'at'd 'a been to
pay.”

The next week, in consequence of an invitation from Lady Ellen
Treffinger, MacMaster went one afternoon to take tea with her. He was
shown into the garden that lay between the residence and the studio,
where the tea table was set under a gnarled pear tree. Lady Ellen rose
as he approached--he was astonished to note how tall she was--and greeted
him graciously, saying that she already knew him through her sister.
MacMaster felt a certain satisfaction in her; in her reassuring poise
and repose, in the charming modulations of her voice and the indolent
reserve of her full, almond eyes. He was even delighted to find her
face so inscrutable, though it chilled his own warmth and made the open
frankness he had wished to permit himself impossible. It was a long
face, narrow at the chin, very delicately featured, yet steeled by an
impassive mask of self-control. It was behind just such finely cut,
close-sealed faces, MacMaster reflected, that nature sometimes hid
astonishing secrets. But in spite of this suggestion of hardness he
felt that the unerring taste that Treffinger had always shown in larger
matters had not deserted him when he came to the choosing of a wife, and
he admitted that he could not himself have selected a woman who looked
more as Treffinger's wife should look.

While he was explaining the purpose of his frequent visits to the studio
she heard him with courteous interest. “I have read, I think, everything
that has been published on Sir Hugh Treffinger's work, and it seems to
me that there is much left to be said,” he concluded.

“I believe they are rather inadequate,” she remarked vaguely. She
hesitated a moment, absently fingering the ribbons of her gown, then
continued, without raising her eyes; “I hope you will not think me too
exacting if I ask to see the proofs of such chapters of your work as
have to do with Sir Hugh's personal life. I have always asked that
privilege.”

MacMaster hastily assured her as to this, adding, “I mean to touch on
only such facts in his personal life as have to do directly with his
work--such as his monkish education under Ghillini.”

“I see your meaning, I think,” said Lady Ellen, looking at him with
wide, uncomprehending eyes.

When MacMaster stopped at the studio on leaving the house he stood for
some time before Treffinger's one portrait of himself, that brigand of
a picture, with its full throat and square head; the short upper lip
blackened by the close-clipped mustache, the wiry hair tossed down over
the forehead, the strong white teeth set hard on a short pipestem. He
could well understand what manifold tortures the mere grain of the man's
strong red and brown flesh might have inflicted upon a woman like Lady
Ellen. He could conjecture, too, Treffinger's impotent revolt against
that very repose which had so dazzled him when it first defied his
daring; and how once possessed of it, his first instinct had been to
crush it, since he could not melt it.

Toward the close of the season Lady Ellen Treffinger left town.
MacMaster's work was progressing rapidly, and he and James wore away
the days in their peculiar relation, which by this time had much of
friendliness. Excepting for the regular visits of a Jewish picture
dealer, there were few intrusions upon their solitude. Occasionally
a party of Americans rang at the little door in the garden wall,
but usually they departed speedily for the Moorish hall and tinkling
fountain of the great show studio of London, not far away.

This Jew, an Austrian by birth, who had a large business in Melbourne,
Australia, was a man of considerable discrimination, and at once
selected the _Marriage of Phaedra_ as the object of his especial
interest. When, upon his first visit, Lichtenstein had declared the
picture one of the things done for time, MacMaster had rather warmed
toward him and had talked to him very freely. Later, however, the man's
repulsive personality and innate vulgarity so wore upon him that, the
more genuine the Jew's appreciation, the more he resented it and the
more base he somehow felt it to be. It annoyed him to see Lichtenstein
walking up and down before the picture, shaking his head and blinking
his watery eyes over his nose glasses, ejaculating: “Dot is a chem, a
chem! It is wordt to gome den dousant miles for such a bainting, eh ? To
make Eurobe abbreciate such a work of ardt it is necessary to take it
away while she is napping. She has never abbreciated until she has lost,
but,” knowingly, “she will buy back.”

James had, from the first, felt such a distrust of the man that he would
never leave him alone in the studio for a moment. When Lichtenstein
insisted upon having Lady Ellen Treffinger's address James rose to the
point of insolence. “It ayn't no use to give it, noway. Lydy Treffinger
never has nothink to do with dealers.” MacMaster quietly repented his
rash confidences, fearing that he might indirectly cause Lady Ellen
annoyance from this merciless speculator, and he recalled with chagrin
that Lichtenstein had extorted from him, little by little, pretty much
the entire plan of his book, and especially the place in it which the
_Marriage of Phaedra_ was to occupy.

By this time the first chapters of MacMaster's book were in the hands
of his publisher, and his visits to the studio were necessarily less
frequent. The greater part of his time was now employed with the
engravers who were to reproduce such of Treffinger's pictures as he
intended to use as illustrations.

He returned to his hotel late one evening after a long and vexing day at
the engravers to find James in his room, seated on his steamer trunk by
the window, with the outline of a great square draped in sheets resting
against his knee.

“Why, James, what's up ?” he cried in astonishment, glancing inquiringly
at the sheeted object.

“Ayn't you seen the pypers, sir ?” jerked out the man.

“No, now I think of it, I haven't even looked at a paper. I've been at
the engravers' plant all day. I haven't seen anything.”

James drew a copy of the _Times_ from his pocket and handed it to him,
pointing with a tragic finger to a paragraph in the social column. It
was merely the announcement of Lady Ellen Treffinger's engagement to
Captain Alexander Gresham.

“Well, what of it, my man ? That surely is her privilege.”

James took the paper, turned to another page, and silently pointed to
a paragraph in the art notes which stated that Lady Treffinger had
presented to the X--gallery the entire collection of paintings and
sketches now in her late husband's studio, with the exception of his
unfinished picture, the _Marriage Of Phaedra_, which she had sold for
a large sum to an Australian dealer who had come to London purposely to
secure some of Treffinger's paintings.

MacMaster pursed up his lips and sat down, his overcoat still on.
“Well, James, this is something of a--something of a jolt, eh ? It never
occurred to me she'd really do it.”

“Lord, you don't know 'er, sir,” said James bitterly, still staring at
the floor in an attitude of abandoned dejection.

MacMaster started up in a flash of enlightenment, “What on earth have
you got there, James ? It's not-surely it's not--”

“Yes, it is, sir,” broke in the man excitedly. “It's the _Marriage_
itself. It ayn't agoing to H'Australia, no'ow!”

“But man, what are you going to do with it ? It's Lichtenstein's property
now, as it seems.”

“It ayn't, sir, that it ayn't. No, by Gawd, it ayn't!” shouted James,
breaking into a choking fury. He controlled himself with an effort
and added supplicatingly: “Oh, sir, you ayn't agoing to see it go to
H'Australia, w'ere they send convic's ?” He unpinned and flung aside the
sheets as though to let _Phaedra_ plead for herself.

MacMaster sat down again and looked sadly at the doomed masterpiece.
The notion of James having carried it across London that night rather
appealed to his fancy. There was certainly a flavor about such a
highhanded proceeding. “However did you get it here ?” he queried.

“I got a four-wheeler and come over direct, sir. Good job I 'appened to
'ave the chaynge about me.”

“You came up High Street, up Piccadilly, through the Haymarket and
Trafalgar Square, and into the Strand ?” queried MacMaster with a relish.

“Yes, sir. Of course, sir,” assented James with surprise.

MacMaster laughed delightedly. “It was a beautiful idea, James, but I'm
afraid we can't carry it any further.”

“I was thinkin' as 'ow it would be a rare chance to get you to take the
_Marriage_ over to Paris for a year or two, sir, until the thing blows
over ?” suggested James blandly.

“I'm afraid that's out of the question, James. I haven't the right stuff
in me for a pirate, or even a vulgar smuggler, I'm afraid.” MacMaster
found it surprisingly difficult to say this, and he busied himself with
the lamp as he said it. He heard James's hand fall heavily on the trunk
top, and he discovered that he very much disliked sinking in the man's
estimation.

“Well, sir,” remarked James in a more formal tone, after a protracted
silence; “then there's nothink for it but as 'ow I'll 'ave to make way
with it myself.”

“And how about your character, James ? The evidence would be heavy
against you, and even if Lady Treffinger didn't prosecute you'd be done
for.”

“Blow my character!--your pardon, sir,” cried James, starting to his
feet. “W'at do I want of a character ? I'll chuck the 'ole thing, and
damned lively, too. The shop's to be sold out, an' my place is gone
any'ow. I'm agoing to enlist, or try the gold fields. I've lived too
long with h'artists; I'd never give satisfaction in livery now. You know
'ow it is yourself, sir; there ayn't no life like it, no'ow.”

For a moment MacMaster was almost equal to abetting James in his theft.
He reflected that pictures had been whitewashed, or hidden in the crypts
of churches, or under the floors of palaces from meaner motives, and to
save them from a fate less ignominious. But presently, with a sigh, he
shook his head.

“No, James, it won't do at all. It has been tried over and over again,
ever since the world has been agoing and pictures amaking. It was tried
in Florence and in Venice, but the pictures were always carried away in
the end. You see, the difficulty is that although Treffinger told you
what was not to be done with the picture, he did not say definitely what
was to be done with it. Do you think Lady Treffinger really understands
that he did not want it to be sold ?”

“Well, sir, it was like this, sir,” said James, resuming his seat on the
trunk and again resting the picture against his knee. “My memory is as
clear as glass about it. After Sir 'Ugh got up from 'is first stroke, 'e
took a fresh start at the _Marriage_. Before that 'e 'ad been working
at it only at night for a while back; the _Legend_ was the big picture
then, an' was under the north light w'ere 'e worked of a morning. But
one day 'e bid me take the _Legend_ down an' put the _Marriage_ in its
place, an' 'e says, dashin' on 'is jacket, 'Jymes, this is a start for
the finish, this time.'

“From that on 'e worked at the night picture in the mornin'--a thing
contrary to 'is custom. The _Marriage_ went wrong, and wrong--an' Sir
'Ugh agettin' seedier an' seedier every day. 'E tried models an' models,
an' smudged an' pynted out on account of 'er face goin' wrong in the
shadow. Sometimes 'e layed it on the colors, an' swore at me an' things
in general. He got that discouraged about 'imself that on 'is low days
'e used to say to me: 'Jymes, remember one thing; if anythink 'appens to
me, the _Marriage_ is not to go out of 'ere unfinished. It's worth the
lot of 'em, my boy, an' it's not agoing to go shabby for lack of pains.'
'E said things to that effect repeated.

“He was workin' at the picture the last day, before 'e went to 'is club.
'E kept the carriage waitin' near an hour while 'e put on a stroke an'
then drawed back for to look at it, an' then put on another, careful
like. After 'e 'ad 'is gloves on, 'e come back an' took away the brushes
I was startin' to clean, an' put in another touch or two. 'It's acomin',
Jymes,' 'e says, 'by gad if it ayn't.' An' with that 'e goes out. It was
cruel sudden, w'at come after.

“That night I was lookin' to 'is clothes at the 'ouse when they brought
'im 'ome. He was conscious, but w'en I ran downstairs for to 'elp lift
'im up, I knowed 'e was a finished man. After we got 'im into bed 'e
kept lookin' restless at me and then at Lydy Elling and ajerkin' of 'is
'and. Finally 'e quite raised it an' shot 'is thumb out toward the wall.
'He wants water; ring, Jymes,' says Lydy Elling, placid. But I knowed 'e
was pointin' to the shop.

“'Lydy Treffinger,' says I, bold, 'he's pointin' to the studio. He means
about the _Marriage_; 'e told me today as 'ow 'e never wanted it sold
unfinished. Is that it, Sir 'Ugh ?'

“He smiled an' nodded slight an' closed 'is eyes. 'Thank you, Jymes,'
says Lydy Elling, placid. Then 'e opened 'is eyes an' looked long and
'ard at Lydy Elling.

“'Of course I'll try to do as you'd wish about the picture, 'Ugh, if
that's w'at's troublin' you,' she says quiet. With that 'e closed 'is
eyes and 'e never opened 'em. He died unconscious at four that mornin'.

“You see, sir, Lydy Elling was always cruel 'ard on the _Marriage_. From
the first it went wrong, an' Sir 'Ugh was out of temper pretty constant.
She came into the studio one day and looked at the picture an 'asked
'im why 'e didn't throw it up an' quit aworriting 'imself. He answered
sharp, an' with that she said as 'ow she didn't see w'at there was to
make such a row about, no'ow. She spoke 'er mind about that picture,
free; an' Sir 'Ugh swore 'ot an' let a 'andful of brushes fly at 'is
study, an' Lydy Elling picked up 'er skirts careful an' chill, an'
drifted out of the studio with 'er eyes calm and 'er chin 'igh. If there
was one thing Lydy Elling 'ad no comprehension of, it was the usefulness
of swearin'. So the _Marriage_ was a sore thing between 'em. She is
uncommon calm, but uncommon bitter, is Lydy Elling. She's never come
anear the studio since that day she went out 'oldin' up of 'er skirts.
W'en 'er friends goes over she excuses 'erself along o' the strain.
Strain--Gawd!” James ground his wrath short in his teeth.

“I'll tell you what I'll do, James, and it's our only hope. I'll see
Lady Ellen tomorrow. The _Times_ says she returned today. You take the
picture back to its place, and I'll do what I can for it. If anything is
done to save it, it must be done through Lady Ellen Treffinger herself,
that much is clear. I can't think that she fully understands the
situation. If she did, you know, she really couldn't have any motive--”
 He stopped suddenly. Somehow, in the dusky lamplight, her small,
close-sealed face came ominously back to him. He rubbed his forehead
and knitted his brows thoughtfully. After a moment he shook his head
and went on: “I am positive that nothing can be gained by highhanded
methods, James. Captain Gresham is one of the most popular men in
London, and his friends would tear up Treffinger's bones if he were
annoyed by any scandal of our making--and this scheme you propose would
inevitably result in scandal. Lady Ellen has, of course, every legal
right to sell the picture. Treffinger made considerable inroads upon
her estate, and, as she is about to marry a man without income, she
doubtless feels that she has a right to replenish her patrimony.”

He found James amenable, though doggedly skeptical. He went down into
the street, called a carriage, and saw James and his burden into it.
Standing in the doorway, he watched the carriage roll away through
the drizzling mist, weave in and out among the wet, black vehicles and
darting cab lights, until it was swallowed up in the glare and confusion
of the Strand. “It is rather a fine touch of irony,” he reflected,
“that he, who is so out of it, should be the one to really care. Poor
Treffinger,” he murmured as, with a rather spiritless smile, he turned
back into his hotel. “Poor Treffinger; _sic transit gloria_.”

The next afternoon MacMaster kept his promise. When he arrived at Lady
Mary Percy's house he saw preparations for a function of some sort, but
he went resolutely up the steps, telling the footman that his business
was urgent. Lady Ellen came down alone, excusing her sister. She was
dressed for receiving, and MacMaster had never seen one so beautiful.
The color in her cheeks sent a softening glow over her small, delicately
cut features.

MacMaster apologized for his intrusion and came unflinchingly to the
object of his call. He had come, he said, not only to offer her his
warmest congratulations, but to express his regret that a great work of
art was to leave England.

Lady Treffinger looked at him in wide-eyed astonishment. Surely, she
said, she had been careful to select the best of the pictures for the
X--- gallery, in accordance with Sir Hugh Treffinger's wishes.

“And did he--pardon me, Lady Treffinger, but in mercy set my mind at
rest--did he or did he not express any definite wish concerning this one
picture, which to me seems worth all the others, unfinished as it is ?”

Lady Treffinger paled perceptibly, but it was not the pallor of
confusion. When she spoke there was a sharp tremor in her smooth voice,
the edge of a resentment that tore her like pain. “I think his man has
some such impression, but I believe it to be utterly unfounded. I cannot
find that he ever expressed any wish concerning the disposition of the
picture to any of his friends. Unfortunately, Sir Hugh was not always
discreet in his remarks to his servants.”

“Captain Gresham, Lady Ellingham, and Miss Ellingham,” announced a
servant, appearing at the door.

There was a murmur in the hall, and MacMaster greeted the smiling
Captain and his aunt as he bowed himself out.

To all intents and purposes the _Marriage of Phaedra_ was already
entombed in a vague continent in the Pacific, somewhere on the other
side of the world.




A Wagner Matinee

I received one morning a letter, written in pale ink on glassy,
blue-lined notepaper, and bearing the postmark of a little Nebraska
village. This communication, worn and rubbed, looking as though it had
been carried for some days in a coat pocket that was none too clean, was
from my Uncle Howard and informed me that his wife had been left a small
legacy by a bachelor relative who had recently died, and that it would
be necessary for her to go to Boston to attend to the settling of
the estate. He requested me to meet her at the station and render her
whatever services might be necessary. On examining the date indicated
as that of her arrival I found it no later than tomorrow. He had
characteristically delayed writing until, had I been away from home for
a day, I must have missed the good woman altogether.

The name of my Aunt Georgiana called up not alone her own figure,
at once pathetic and grotesque, but opened before my feet a gulf of
recollection so wide and deep that, as the letter dropped from my
hand, I felt suddenly a stranger to all the present conditions of
my existence, wholly ill at ease and out of place amid the familiar
surroundings of my study. I became, in short, the gangling farm boy
my aunt had known, scourged with chilblains and bashfulness, my hands
cracked and sore from the corn husking. I felt the knuckles of my thumb
tentatively, as though they were raw again. I sat again before her
parlor organ, fumbling the scales with my stiff, red hands, while she,
beside me, made canvas mittens for the huskers.

The next morning, after preparing my landlady somewhat, I set out for
the station. When the train arrived I had some difficulty in finding my
aunt. She was the last of the passengers to alight, and it was not until
I got her into the carriage that she seemed really to recognize me. She
had come all the way in a day coach; her linen duster had become black
with soot, and her black bonnet gray with dust, during the journey. When
we arrived at my boardinghouse the landlady put her to bed at once and I
did not see her again until the next morning.

Whatever shock Mrs. Springer experienced at my aunt's appearance she
considerately concealed. As for myself, I saw my aunt's misshapen figure
with that feeling of awe and respect with which we behold explorers who
have left their ears and fingers north of Franz Josef Land, or their
health somewhere along the Upper Congo. My Aunt Georgiana had been a
music teacher at the Boston Conservatory, somewhere back in the latter
sixties. One summer, while visiting in the little village among the
Green Mountains where her ancestors had dwelt for generations, she
had kindled the callow fancy of the most idle and shiftless of all the
village lads, and had conceived for this Howard Carpenter one of
those extravagant passions which a handsome country boy of twenty-one
sometimes inspires in an angular, spectacled woman of thirty. When she
returned to her duties in Boston, Howard followed her, and the upshot of
this inexplicable infatuation was that she eloped with him, eluding the
reproaches of her family and the criticisms of her friends by going with
him to the Nebraska frontier. Carpenter, who, of course, had no money,
had taken a homestead in Red Willow County, fifty miles from the
railroad. There they had measured off their quarter section themselves
by driving across the prairie in a wagon, to the wheel of which they had
tied a red cotton handkerchief, and counting off its revolutions. They
built a dugout in the red hillside, one of those cave dwellings whose
inmates so often reverted to primitive conditions. Their water they got
from the lagoons where the buffalo drank, and their slender stock of
provisions was always at the mercy of bands of roving Indians. For
thirty years my aunt had not been further than fifty miles from the
homestead.

But Mrs. Springer knew nothing of all this, and must have been
considerably shocked at what was left of my kinswoman. Beneath the
soiled linen duster which, on her arrival, was the most conspicuous
feature of her costume, she wore a black stuff dress, whose
ornamentation showed that she had surrendered herself unquestioningly
into the hands of a country dressmaker. My poor aunt's figure, however,
would have presented astonishing difficulties to any dressmaker.
Originally stooped, her shoulders were now almost bent together over her
sunken chest. She wore no stays, and her gown, which trailed unevenly
behind, rose in a sort of peak over her abdomen. She wore ill-fitting
false teeth, and her skin was as yellow as a Mongolian's from constant
exposure to a pitiless wind and to the alkaline water which hardens the
most transparent cuticle into a sort of flexible leather.

I owed to this woman most of the good that ever came my way in my
boyhood, and had a reverential affection for her. During the years
when I was riding herd for my uncle, my aunt, after cooking the three
meals--the first of which was ready at six o'clock in the morning-and
putting the six children to bed, would often stand until midnight at
her ironing board, with me at the kitchen table beside her, hearing me
recite Latin declensions and conjugations, gently shaking me when my
drowsy head sank down over a page of irregular verbs. It was to her, at
her ironing or mending, that I read my first Shakespeare', and her old
textbook on mythology was the first that ever came into my empty hands.
She taught me my scales and exercises, too--on the little parlor organ,
which her husband had bought her after fifteen years, during which she
had not so much as seen any instrument, but an accordion that belonged
to one of the Norwegian farmhands. She would sit beside me by the hour,
darning and counting while I struggled with the “Joyous Farmer,” but she
seldom talked to me about music, and I understood why. She was a pious
woman; she had the consolations of religion and, to her at least, her
martyrdom was not wholly sordid. Once when I had been doggedly beating
out some easy passages from an old score of _Euryanthe_ I had found
among her music books, she came up to me and, putting her hands over my
eyes, gently drew my head back upon her shoulder, saying tremulously,
“Don't love it so well, Clark, or it may be taken from you. Oh, dear
boy, pray that whatever your sacrifice may be, it be not that.”

When my aunt appeared on the morning after her arrival she was still in
a semi-somnambulant state. She seemed not to realize that she was in the
city where she had spent her youth, the place longed for hungrily half
a lifetime. She had been so wretchedly train-sick throughout the journey
that she had no recollection of anything but her discomfort, and, to all
intents and purposes, there were but a few hours of nightmare between
the farm in Red Willow County and my study on Newbury Street. I had
planned a little pleasure for her that afternoon, to repay her for some
of the glorious moments she had given me when we used to milk together
in the straw-thatched cowshed and she, because I was more than usually
tired, or because her husband had spoken sharply to me, would tell me
of the splendid performance of the _Huguenots_ she had seen in Paris,
in her youth. At two o'clock the Symphony Orchestra was to give a Wagner
program, and I intended to take my aunt; though, as I conversed with her
I grew doubtful about her enjoyment of it. Indeed, for her own sake,
I could only wish her taste for such things quite dead, and the
long struggle mercifully ended at last. I suggested our visiting the
Conservatory and the Common before lunch, but she seemed altogether too
timid to wish to venture out. She questioned me absently about various
changes in the city, but she was chiefly concerned that she had
forgotten to leave instructions about feeding half-skimmed milk to
a certain weakling calf, “old Maggie's calf, you know, Clark,” she
explained, evidently having forgotten how long I had been away. She was
further troubled because she had neglected to tell her daughter about
the freshly opened kit of mackerel in the cellar, which would spoil if
it were not used directly.

I asked her whether she had ever heard any of the Wagnerian operas and
found that she had not, though she was perfectly familiar with their
respective situations, and had once possessed the piano score of _The
Flying Dutchman_. I began to think it would have been best to get her
back to Red Willow County without waking her, and regretted having
suggested the concert.

From the time we entered the concert hall, however, she was a trifle
less passive and inert, and for the first time seemed to perceive her
surroundings. I had felt some trepidation lest she might become aware
of the absurdities of her attire, or might experience some painful
embarrassment at stepping suddenly into the world to which she had been
dead for a quarter of a century. But, again, I found how superficially
I had judged her. She sat looking about her with eyes as impersonal,
almost as stony, as those with which the granite Rameses in a
museum watches the froth and fret that ebbs and flows about his
pedestal-separated from it by the lonely stretch of centuries. I have
seen this same aloofness in old miners who drift into the Brown Hotel at
Denver, their pockets full of bullion, their linen soiled, their haggard
faces unshaven; standing in the thronged corridors as solitary as though
they were still in a frozen camp on the Yukon, conscious that certain
experiences have isolated them from their fellows by a gulf no
haberdasher could bridge.

We sat at the extreme left of the first balcony, facing the arch of our
own and the balcony above us, veritable hanging gardens, brilliant as
tulip beds. The matinee audience was made up chiefly of women. One
lost the contour of faces and figures--indeed, any effect of line
whatever--and there was only the color of bodices past counting, the
shimmer of fabrics soft and firm, silky and sheer: red, mauve, pink,
blue, lilac, purple, ecru, rose, yellow, cream, and white, all the
colors that an impressionist finds in a sunlit landscape, with here and
there the dead shadow of a frock coat. My Aunt Georgiana regarded them
as though they had been so many daubs of tube-paint on a palette.

When the musicians came out and took their places, she gave a little
stir of anticipation and looked with quickening interest down over the
rail at that invariable grouping, perhaps the first wholly familiar
thing that had greeted her eye since she had left old Maggie and her
weakling calf. I could feel how all those details sank into her soul,
for I had not forgotten how they had sunk into mine when I came fresh
from plowing forever and forever between green aisles of corn, where, as
in a treadmill, one might walk from daybreak to dusk without perceiving
a shadow of change. The clean profiles of the musicians, the gloss of
their linen, the dull black of their coats, the beloved shapes of the
instruments, the patches of yellow light thrown by the green-shaded
lamps on the smooth, varnished bellies of the cellos and the bass viols
in the rear, the restless, wind-tossed forest of fiddle necks and bows--I
recalled how, in the first orchestra I had ever heard, those long bow
strokes seemed to draw the heart out of me, as a conjurer's stick reels
out yards of paper ribbon from a hat.

The first number was the _Tannhauser_ overture. When the horns drew out
the first strain of the Pilgrim's chorus my Aunt Georgiana clutched
my coat sleeve. Then it was I first realized that for her this broke a
silence of thirty years; the inconceivable silence of the plains. With
the battle between the two motives, with the frenzy of the Venusberg
theme and its ripping of strings, there came to me an overwhelming sense
of the waste and wear we are so powerless to combat; and I saw again the
tall, naked house on the prairie, black and grim as a wooden fortress;
the black pond where I had learned to swim, its margin pitted with
sun-dried cattle tracks; the rain-gullied clay banks about the naked
house, the four dwarf ash seedlings where the dishcloths were always
hung to dry before the kitchen door. The world there was the flat world
of the ancients; to the east, a cornfield that stretched to daybreak;
to the west, a corral that reached to sunset; between, the conquests of
peace, dearer bought than those of war.

The overture closed; my aunt released my coat sleeve, but she said
nothing. She sat staring at the orchestra through a dullness of thirty
years, through the films made little by little by each of the three
hundred and sixty-five days in every one of them. What, I wondered, did
she get from it ? She had been a good pianist in her day I knew, and her
musical education had been broader than that of most music teachers of
a quarter of a century ago. She had often told me of Mozart's operas and
Meyerbeer's, and I could remember hearing her sing, years ago, certain
melodies of Verdi's. When I had fallen ill with a fever in her house she
used to sit by my cot in the evening--when the cool, night wind blew
in through the faded mosquito netting tacked over the window, and I lay
watching a certain bright star that burned red above the cornfield--and
sing “Home to our mountains, O, let us return!” in a way fit to break
the heart of a Vermont boy near dead of homesickness already.

I watched her closely through the prelude to _Tristan and Isolde_,
trying vainly to conjecture what that seething turmoil of strings and
winds might mean to her, but she sat mutely staring at the violin bows
that drove obliquely downward, like the pelting streaks of rain in a
summer shower. Had this music any message for her ? Had she enough left
to at all comprehend this power which had kindled the world since she
had left it ? I was in a fever of curiosity, but Aunt Georgiana sat
silent upon her peak in Darien. She preserved this utter immobility
throughout the number from _The Flying Dutchman_, though her fingers
worked mechanically upon her black dress, as though, of themselves, they
were recalling the piano score they had once played. Poor old hands!
They had been stretched and twisted into mere tentacles to hold and
lift and knead with; the palms unduly swollen, the fingers bent and
knotted--on one of them a thin, worn band that had once been a wedding
ring. As I pressed and gently quieted one of those groping hands I
remembered with quivering eyelids their services for me in other days.

Soon after the tenor began the “Prize Song,” I heard a quick drawn
breath and turned to my aunt. Her eyes were closed, but the tears were
glistening on her cheeks, and I think, in a moment more, they were in
my eyes as well. It never really died, then--the soul that can suffer so
excruciatingly and so interminably; it withers to the outward eye only;
like that strange moss which can lie on a dusty shelf half a century and
yet, if placed in water, grows green again. She wept so throughout the
development and elaboration of the melody.

During the intermission before the second half of the concert, I
questioned my aunt and found that the “Prize Song” was not new to her.
Some years before there had drifted to the farm in Red Willow County a
young German, a tramp cowpuncher, who had sung the chorus at Bayreuth,
when he was a boy, along with the other peasant boys and girls. Of a
Sunday morning he used to sit on his gingham-sheeted bed in the hands'
bedroom which opened off the kitchen, cleaning the leather of his boots
and saddle, singing the “Prize Song,” while my aunt went about her work
in the kitchen. She had hovered about him until she had prevailed upon
him to join the country church, though his sole fitness for this step,
insofar as I could gather, lay in his boyish face and his possession of
this divine melody. Shortly afterward he had gone to town on the Fourth
of July, been drunk for several days, lost his money at a faro table,
ridden a saddled Texan steer on a bet, and disappeared with a fractured
collarbone. All this my aunt told me huskily, wanderingly, as though she
were talking in the weak lapses of illness.

“Well, we have come to better things than the old _Trovatore_ at any
rate, Aunt Georgie ?” I queried, with a well-meant effort at jocularity.

Her lip quivered and she hastily put her handkerchief up to her mouth.
From behind it she murmured, “And you have been hearing this ever
since you left me, Clark ?” Her question was the gentlest and saddest of
reproaches.

The second half of the program consisted of four numbers from the
_Ring_, and closed with Siegfried's funeral march. My aunt wept quietly,
but almost continuously, as a shallow vessel overflows in a rainstorm.
From time to time her dim eyes looked up at the lights which studded the
ceiling, burning softly under their dull glass globes; doubtless they
were stars in truth to her. I was still perplexed as to what measure of
musical comprehension was left to her, she who had heard nothing but
the singing of gospel hymns at Methodist services in the square frame
schoolhouse on Section Thirteen for so many years. I was wholly unable
to gauge how much of it had been dissolved in soapsuds, or worked into
bread, or milked into the bottom of a pail.

The deluge of sound poured on and on; I never knew what she found in the
shining current of it; I never knew how far it bore her, or past what
happy islands. From the trembling of her face I could well believe that
before the last numbers she had been carried out where the myriad graves
are, into the gray, nameless burying grounds of the sea; or into some
world of death vaster yet, where, from the beginning of the world, hope
has lain down with hope and dream with dream and, renouncing, slept.

The concert was over; the people filed out of the hall chattering
and laughing, glad to relax and find the living level again, but my
kinswoman made no effort to rise. The harpist slipped its green felt
cover over his instrument; the flute players shook the water from their
mouthpieces; the men of the orchestra went out one by one, leaving the
stage to the chairs and music stands, empty as a winter cornfield.

I spoke to my aunt. She burst into tears and sobbed pleadingly. “I don't
want to go, Clark, I don't want to go!”

I understood. For her, just outside the door of the concert hall, lay
the black pond with the cattle-tracked bluffs; the tall, unpainted
house, with weather-curled boards; naked as a tower, the crook-backed
ash seedlings where the dishcloths hung to dry; the gaunt, molting
turkeys picking up refuse about the kitchen door.




Paul's Case

_A Study in Temperament_

It was Paul's afternoon to appear before the faculty of the Pittsburgh
High School to account for his various misdemeanors. He had been
suspended a week ago, and his father had called at the Principal's
office and confessed his perplexity about his son. Paul entered the
faculty room suave and smiling. His clothes were a trifle outgrown, and
the tan velvet on the collar of his open overcoat was frayed and worn;
but for all that there was something of the dandy about him, and he
wore an opal pin in his neatly knotted black four-in-hand, and a red
carnation in his buttonhole. This latter adornment the faculty somehow
felt was not properly significant of the contrite spirit befitting a boy
under the ban of suspension.

Paul was tall for his age and very thin, with high, cramped shoulders
and a narrow chest. His eyes were remarkable for a certain hysterical
brilliancy, and he continually used them in a conscious, theatrical sort
of way, peculiarly offensive in a boy. The pupils were abnormally large,
as though he were addicted to belladonna, but there was a glassy glitter
about them which that drug does not produce.

When questioned by the Principal as to why he was there Paul stated,
politely enough, that he wanted to come back to school. This was a lie,
but Paul was quite accustomed to lying; found it, indeed, indispensable
for overcoming friction. His teachers were asked to state their
respective charges against him, which they did with such a rancor and
aggrievedness as evinced that this was not a usual case, Disorder and
impertinence were among the offenses named, yet each of his instructors
felt that it was scarcely possible to put into words the real cause of
the trouble, which lay in a sort of hysterically defiant manner of the
boy's; in the contempt which they all knew he felt for them, and which
he seemingly made not the least effort to conceal. Once, when he had
been making a synopsis of a paragraph at the blackboard, his English
teacher had stepped to his side and attempted to guide his hand. Paul
had started back with a shudder and thrust his hands violently behind
him. The astonished woman could scarcely have been more hurt and
embarrassed had he struck at her. The insult was so involuntary and
definitely personal as to be unforgettable. In one way and another he
had made all his teachers, men and women alike, conscious of the same
feeling of physical aversion. In one class he habitually sat with his
hand shading his eyes; in another he always looked out of the window
during the recitation; in another he made a running commentary on the
lecture, with humorous intention.

His teachers felt this afternoon that his whole attitude was symbolized
by his shrug and his flippantly red carnation flower, and they fell
upon him without mercy, his English teacher leading the pack. He stood
through it smiling, his pale lips parted over his white teeth. (His lips
were continually twitching, and he had a habit of raising his eyebrows
that was contemptuous and irritating to the last degree.) Older boys
than Paul had broken down and shed tears under that baptism of fire, but
his set smile did not once desert him, and his only sign of discomfort
was the nervous trembling of the fingers that toyed with the buttons of
his overcoat, and an occasional jerking of the other hand that held his
hat. Paul was always smiling, always glancing about him, seeming to feel
that people might be watching him and trying to detect something.
This conscious expression, since it was as far as possible from boyish
mirthfulness, was usually attributed to insolence or “smartness.”

As the inquisition proceeded one of his instructors repeated an
impertinent remark of the boy's, and the Principal asked him whether he
thought that a courteous speech to have made a woman. Paul shrugged his
shoulders slightly and his eyebrows twitched.

“I don't know,” he replied. “I didn't mean to be polite or impolite,
either. I guess it's a sort of way I have of saying things regardless.”

The Principal, who was a sympathetic man, asked him whether he didn't
think that a way it would be well to get rid of. Paul grinned and said
he guessed so. When he was told that he could go he bowed gracefully and
went out. His bow was but a repetition of the scandalous red carnation.

His teachers were in despair, and his drawing master voiced the feeling
of them all when he declared there was something about the boy which
none of them understood. He added: “I don't really believe that smile of
his comes altogether from insolence; there's something sort of haunted
about it. The boy is not strong, for one thing. I happen to know that he
was born in Colorado, only a few months before his mother died out there
of a long illness. There is something wrong about the fellow.”

The drawing master had come to realize that, in looking at Paul, one
saw only his white teeth and the forced animation of his eyes. One warm
afternoon the boy had gone to sleep at his drawing board, and his master
had noted with amazement what a white, blue-veined face it was; drawn
and wrinkled like an old man's about the eyes, the lips twitching even
in his sleep, and stiff with a nervous tension that drew them back from
his teeth.

His teachers left the building dissatisfied and unhappy; humiliated to
have felt so vindictive toward a mere boy, to have uttered this feeling
in cutting terms, and to have set each other on, as it were, in the
gruesome game of intemperate reproach. Some of them remembered having
seen a miserable street cat set at bay by a ring of tormentors.

As for Paul, he ran down the hill whistling the “Soldiers' Chorus” from
_Faust_, looking wildly behind him now and then to see whether some of
his teachers were not there to writhe under his lightheartedness. As it
was now late in the afternoon and Paul was on duty that evening as usher
at Carnegie Hall, he decided that he would not go home to supper. When
he reached the concert hall the doors were not yet open and, as it was
chilly outside, he decided to go up into the picture gallery--always
deserted at this hour--where there were some of Raffelli's gay studies
of Paris streets and an airy blue Venetian scene or two that always
exhilarated him. He was delighted to find no one in the gallery but the
old guard, who sat in one corner, a newspaper on his knee, a black patch
over one eye and the other closed. Paul possessed himself of the peace
and walked confidently up and down, whistling under his breath. After a
while he sat down before a blue Rico and lost himself. When he bethought
him to look at his watch, it was after seven o'clock, and he rose with
a start and ran downstairs, making a face at Augustus, peering out from
the cast room, and an evil gesture at the Venus de Milo as he passed her
on the stairway.

When Paul reached the ushers' dressing room half a dozen boys were there
already, and he began excitedly to tumble into his uniform. It was one
of the few that at all approached fitting, and Paul thought it very
becoming--though he knew that the tight, straight coat accentuated his
narrow chest, about which he was exceedingly sensitive. He was always
considerably excited while he dressed, twanging all over to the tuning
of the strings and the preliminary flourishes of the horns in the music
room; but tonight he seemed quite beside himself, and he teased and
plagued the boys until, telling him that he was crazy, they put him down
on the floor and sat on him.

Somewhat calmed by his suppression, Paul dashed out to the front of
the house to seat the early comers. He was a model usher; gracious and
smiling he ran up and down the aisles; nothing was too much trouble
for him; he carried messages and brought programs as though it were his
greatest pleasure in life, and all the people in his section thought
him a charming boy, feeling that he remembered and admired them. As
the house filled, he grew more and more vivacious and animated, and the
color came to his cheeks and lips. It was very much as though this were
a great reception and Paul were the host. Just as the musicians came out
to take their places, his English teacher arrived with checks for the
seats which a prominent manufacturer had taken for the season. She
betrayed some embarrassment when she handed Paul the tickets, and a
hauteur which subsequently made her feel very foolish. Paul was startled
for a moment, and had the feeling of wanting to put her out; what
business had she here among all these fine people and gay colors ? He
looked her over and decided that she was not appropriately dressed and
must be a fool to sit downstairs in such togs. The tickets had probably
been sent her out of kindness, he reflected as he put down a seat for
her, and she had about as much right to sit there as he had.

When the symphony began Paul sank into one of the rear seats with a long
sigh of relief, and lost himself as he had done before the Rico. It was
not that symphonies, as such, meant anything in particular to Paul,
but the first sigh of the instruments seemed to free some hilarious and
potent spirit within him; something that struggled there like the genie
in the bottle found by the Arab fisherman. He felt a sudden zest of
life; the lights danced before his eyes and the concert hall blazed into
unimaginable splendor. When the soprano soloist came on Paul forgot even
the nastiness of his teacher's being there and gave himself up to
the peculiar stimulus such personages always had for him. The soloist
chanced to be a German woman, by no means in her first youth, and the
mother of many children; but she wore an elaborate gown and a tiara, and
above all she had that indefinable air of achievement, that world-shine
upon her, which, in Paul's eyes, made her a veritable queen of Romance.

After a concert was over Paul was always irritable and wretched until he
got to sleep, and tonight he was even more than usually restless. He had
the feeling of not being able to let down, of its being impossible to
give up this delicious excitement which was the only thing that could
be called living at all. During the last number he withdrew and, after
hastily changing his clothes in the dressing room, slipped out to the
side door where the soprano's carriage stood. Here he began pacing
rapidly up and down the walk, waiting to see her come out.

Over yonder, the Schenley, in its vacant stretch, loomed big and square
through the fine rain, the windows of its twelve stories glowing like
those of a lighted cardboard house under a Christmas tree. All the
actors and singers of the better class stayed there when they were in
the city, and a number of the big manufacturers of the place lived there
in the winter. Paul had often hung about the hotel, watching the people
go in and out, longing to enter and leave schoolmasters and dull care
behind him forever.

At last the singer came out, accompanied by the conductor, who
helped her into her carriage and closed the door with a cordial _auf
wiedersehen_ which set Paul to wondering whether she were not an old
sweetheart of his. Paul followed the carriage over to the hotel, walking
so rapidly as not to be far from the entrance when the singer alighted,
and disappeared behind the swinging glass doors that were opened by a
Negro in a tall hat and a long coat. In the moment that the door was
ajar it seemed to Paul that he, too, entered. He seemed to feel himself
go after her up the steps, into the warm, lighted building, into an
exotic, tropical world of shiny, glistening surfaces and basking ease.
He reflected upon the mysterious dishes that were brought into the
dining room, the green bottles in buckets of ice, as he had seen them in
the supper party pictures of the _Sunday World_ supplement. A quick
gust of wind brought the rain down with sudden vehemence, and Paul was
startled to find that he was still outside in the slush of the gravel
driveway; that his boots were letting in the water and his scanty
overcoat was clinging wet about him; that the lights in front of the
concert hall were out and that the rain was driving in sheets between
him and the orange glow of the windows above him. There it was, what
he wanted--tangibly before him, like the fairy world of a Christmas
pantomime--but mocking spirits stood guard at the doors, and, as the
rain beat in his face, Paul wondered whether he were destined always to
shiver in the black night outside, looking up at it.

He turned and walked reluctantly toward the car tracks. The end had to
come sometime; his father in his nightclothes at the top of the stairs,
explanations that did not explain, hastily improvised fictions that
were forever tripping him up, his upstairs room and its horrible yellow
wallpaper, the creaking bureau with the greasy plush collarbox, and
over his painted wooden bed the pictures of George Washington and John
Calvin, and the framed motto, “Feed my Lambs,” which had been worked in
red worsted by his mother.

Half an hour later Paul alighted from his car and went slowly down
one of the side streets off the main thoroughfare. It was a highly
respectable street, where all the houses were exactly alike, and
where businessmen of moderate means begot and reared large families of
children, all of whom went to Sabbath school and learned the shorter
catechism, and were interested in arithmetic; all of whom were as
exactly alike as their homes, and of a piece with the monotony in which
they lived. Paul never went up Cordelia Street without a shudder of
loathing. His home was next to the house of the Cumberland minister. He
approached it tonight with the nerveless sense of defeat, the hopeless
feeling of sinking back forever into ugliness and commonness that he had
always had when he came home. The moment he turned into Cordelia Street
he felt the waters close above his head. After each of these orgies
of living he experienced all the physical depression which follows a
debauch; the loathing of respectable beds, of common food, of a house
penetrated by kitchen odors; a shuddering repulsion for the flavorless,
colorless mass of everyday existence; a morbid desire for cool things
and soft lights and fresh flowers.

The nearer he approached the house, the more absolutely unequal Paul
felt to the sight of it all: his ugly sleeping chamber; the cold
bathroom with the grimy zinc tub, the cracked mirror, the dripping
spiggots; his father, at the top of the stairs, his hairy legs sticking
out from his nightshirt, his feet thrust into carpet slippers. He was
so much later than usual that there would certainly be inquiries and
reproaches. Paul stopped short before the door. He felt that he could
not be accosted by his father tonight; that he could not toss again on
that miserable bed. He would not go in. He would tell his father that he
had no carfare and it was raining so hard he had gone home with one of
the boys and stayed all night.

Meanwhile, he was wet and cold. He went around to the back of the
house and tried one of the basement windows, found it open, raised it
cautiously, and scrambled down the cellar wall to the floor. There he
stood, holding his breath, terrified by the noise he had made, but the
floor above him was silent, and there was no creak on the stairs. He
found a soapbox, and carried it over to the soft ring of light that
streamed from the furnace door, and sat down. He was horribly afraid of
rats, so he did not try to sleep, but sat looking distrustfully at the
dark, still terrified lest he might have awakened his father. In such
reactions, after one of the experiences which made days and nights out
of the dreary blanks of the calendar, when his senses were deadened,
Paul's head was always singularly clear. Suppose his father had heard
him getting in at the window and had come down and shot him for a
burglar ? Then, again, suppose his father had come down, pistol in hand,
and he had cried out in time to save himself, and his father had been
horrified to think how nearly he had killed him ? Then, again, suppose
a day should come when his father would remember that night, and
wish there had been no warning cry to stay his hand ? With this last
supposition Paul entertained himself until daybreak.

The following Sunday was fine; the sodden November chill was broken
by the last flash of autumnal summer. In the morning Paul had to go to
church and Sabbath school, as always. On seasonable Sunday afternoons
the burghers of Cordelia Street always sat out on their front stoops and
talked to their neighbors on the next stoop, or called to those across
the street in neighborly fashion. The men usually sat on gay cushions
placed upon the steps that led down to the sidewalk, while the women, in
their Sunday “waists,” sat in rockers on the cramped porches, pretending
to be greatly at their ease. The children played in the streets; there
were so many of them that the place resembled the recreation grounds of
a kindergarten. The men on the steps--all in their shirt sleeves,
their vests unbuttoned--sat with their legs well apart, their stomachs
comfortably protruding, and talked of the prices of things, or told
anecdotes of the sagacity of their various chiefs and overlords. They
occasionally looked over the multitude of squabbling children, listened
affectionately to their high-pitched, nasal voices, smiling to see their
own proclivities reproduced in their offspring, and interspersed their
legends of the iron kings with remarks about their sons' progress at
school, their grades in arithmetic, and the amounts they had saved in
their toy banks.

On this last Sunday of November Paul sat all the afternoon on the lowest
step of his stoop, staring into the street, while his sisters, in their
rockers, were talking to the minister's daughters next door about how
many shirtwaists they had made in the last week, and how many waffles
someone had eaten at the last church supper. When the weather was warm,
and his father was in a particularly jovial frame of mind, the girls
made lemonade, which was always brought out in a red-glass pitcher,
ornamented with forget-me-nots in blue enamel. This the girls thought
very fine, and the neighbors always joked about the suspicious color of
the pitcher.

Today Paul's father sat on the top step, talking to a young man who
shifted a restless baby from knee to knee. He happened to be the young
man who was daily held up to Paul as a model, and after whom it was his
father's dearest hope that he would pattern. This young man was of a
ruddy complexion, with a compressed, red mouth, and faded, nearsighted
eyes, over which he wore thick spectacles, with gold bows that curved
about his ears. He was clerk to one of the magnates of a great steel
corporation, and was looked upon in Cordelia Street as a young man with
a future. There was a story that, some five years ago--he was now barely
twenty-six--he had been a trifle dissipated, but in order to curb his
appetites and save the loss of time and strength that a sowing of
wild oats might have entailed, he had taken his chief's advice, oft
reiterated to his employees, and at twenty-one had married the first
woman whom he could persuade to share his fortunes. She happened to
be an angular schoolmistress, much older than he, who also wore thick
glasses, and who had now borne him four children, all nearsighted, like
herself.

The young man was relating how his chief, now cruising in the
Mediterranean, kept in touch with all the details of the business,
arranging his office hours on his yacht just as though he were at home,
and “knocking off work enough to keep two stenographers busy.” His
father told, in turn, the plan his corporation was considering, of
putting in an electric railway plant in Cairo. Paul snapped his teeth;
he had an awful apprehension that they might spoil it all before he got
there. Yet he rather liked to hear these legends of the iron kings that
were told and retold on Sundays and holidays; these stories of palaces
in Venice, yachts on the Mediterranean, and high play at Monte Carlo
appealed to his fancy, and he was interested in the triumphs of these
cash boys who had become famous, though he had no mind for the cash-boy
stage.

After supper was over and he had helped to dry the dishes, Paul
nervously asked his father whether he could go to George's to get some
help in his geometry, and still more nervously asked for carfare. This
latter request he had to repeat, as his father, on principle, did not
like to hear requests for money, whether much or little. He asked Paul
whether he could not go to some boy who lived nearer, and told him that
he ought not to leave his schoolwork until Sunday; but he gave him the
dime. He was not a poor man, but he had a worthy ambition to come up
in the world. His only reason for allowing Paul to usher was that he
thought a boy ought to be earning a little.

Paul bounded upstairs, scrubbed the greasy odor of the dishwater from
his hands with the ill-smelling soap he hated, and then shook over his
fingers a few drops of violet water from the bottle he kept hidden in
his drawer. He left the house with his geometry conspicuously under his
arm, and the moment he got out of Cordelia Street and boarded a downtown
car, he shook off the lethargy of two deadening days and began to live
again.

The leading juvenile of the permanent stock company which played at one
of the downtown theaters was an acquaintance of Paul's, and the boy
had been invited to drop in at the Sunday-night rehearsals whenever
he could. For more than a year Paul had spent every available moment
loitering about Charley Edwards's dressing room. He had won a place
among Edwards's following not only because the young actor, who could
not afford to employ a dresser, often found him useful, but because he
recognized in Paul something akin to what churchmen term “vocation.”

It was at the theater and at Carnegie Hall that Paul really lived; the
rest was but a sleep and a forgetting. This was Paul's fairy tale,
and it had for him all the allurement of a secret love. The moment he
inhaled the gassy, painty, dusty odor behind the scenes, he breathed
like a prisoner set free, and felt within him the possibility of doing
or saying splendid, brilliant, poetic things. The moment the cracked
orchestra beat out the overture from _Martha_, or jerked at the serenade
from _Rigoletto_, all stupid and ugly things slid from him, and his
senses were deliciously, yet delicately fired.

Perhaps it was because, in Paul's world, the natural nearly always wore
the guise of ugliness, that a certain element of artificiality seemed to
him necessary in beauty. Perhaps it was because his experience of
life elsewhere was so full of Sabbath-school picnics, petty economies,
wholesome advice as to how to succeed in life, and the inescapable odors
of cooking, that he found this existence so alluring, these smartly clad
men and women so attractive, that he was so moved by these starry apple
orchards that bloomed perennially under the limelight.

It would be difficult to put it strongly enough how convincingly
the stage entrance of that theater was for Paul the actual portal of
Romance. Certainly none of the company ever suspected it, least of all
Charley Edwards. It was very like the old stories that used to float
about London of fabulously rich Jews, who had subterranean halls there,
with palms, and fountains, and soft lamps and richly appareled women
who never saw the disenchanting light of London day. So, in the midst of
that smoke-palled city, enamored of figures and grimy toil, Paul had
his secret temple, his wishing carpet, his bit of blue-and-white
Mediterranean shore bathed in perpetual sunshine.

Several of Paul's teachers had a theory that his imagination had been
perverted by garish fiction, but the truth was that he scarcely ever
read at all. The books at home were not such as would either tempt or
corrupt a youthful mind, and as for reading the novels that some of his
friends urged upon him--well, he got what he wanted much more quickly
from music; any sort of music, from an orchestra to a barrel organ.
He needed only the spark, the indescribable thrill that made his
imagination master of his senses, and he could make plots and pictures
enough of his own. It was equally true that he was not stagestruck--not,
at any rate, in the usual acceptation of that expression. He had no
desire to become an actor, any more than he had to become a musician. He
felt no necessity to do any of these things; what he wanted was to see,
to be in the atmosphere, float on the wave of it, to be carried out,
blue league after blue league, away from everything.

After a night behind the scenes Paul found the schoolroom more than ever
repulsive; the bare floors and naked walls; the prosy men who never wore
frock coats, or violets in their buttonholes; the women with their dull
gowns, shrill voices, and pitiful seriousness about prepositions that
govern the dative. He could not bear to have the other pupils think, for
a moment, that he took these people seriously; he must convey to them
that he considered it all trivial, and was there only by way of a jest,
anyway. He had autographed pictures of all the members of the stock
company which he showed his classmates, telling them the most incredible
stories of his familiarity with these people, of his acquaintance with
the soloists who came to Carnegie Hall, his suppers with them and the
flowers he sent them. When these stories lost their effect, and his
audience grew listless, he became desperate and would bid all the boys
good-by, announcing that he was going to travel for a while; going to
Naples, to Venice, to Egypt. Then, next Monday, he would slip back,
conscious and nervously smiling; his sister was ill, and he should have
to defer his voyage until spring.

Matters went steadily worse with Paul at school. In the itch to let his
instructors know how heartily he despised them and their homilies, and
how thoroughly he was appreciated elsewhere, he mentioned once or twice
that he had no time to fool with theorems; adding--with a twitch of
the eyebrows and a touch of that nervous bravado which so perplexed
them--that he was helping the people down at the stock company; they
were old friends of his.

The upshot of the matter was that the Principal went to Paul's father,
and Paul was taken out of school and put to work. The manager at
Carnegie Hall was told to get another usher in his stead; the doorkeeper
at the theater was warned not to admit him to the house; and Charley
Edwards remorsefully promised the boy's father not to see him again.

The members of the stock company were vastly amused when some of Paul's
stories reached them--especially the women. They were hardworking women,
most of them supporting indigent husbands or brothers, and they laughed
rather bitterly at having stirred the boy to such fervid and florid
inventions. They agreed with the faculty and with his father that Paul's
was a bad case.


The eastbound train was plowing through a January snowstorm; the dull
dawn was beginning to show gray when the engine whistled a mile out of
Newark. Paul started up from the seat where he had lain curled in uneasy
slumber, rubbed the breath-misted window glass with his hand, and peered
out. The snow was whirling in curling eddies above the white bottom
lands, and the drifts lay already deep in the fields and along the
fences, while here and there the long dead grass and dried weed stalks
protruded black above it. Lights shone from the scattered houses, and a
gang of laborers who stood beside the track waved their lanterns.

Paul had slept very little, and he felt grimy and uncomfortable. He
had made the all-night journey in a day coach, partly because he was
ashamed, dressed as he was, to go into a Pullman, and partly because he
was afraid of being seen there by some Pittsburgh businessman, who might
have noticed him in Denny & Carson's office. When the whistle awoke him,
he clutched quickly at his breast pocket, glancing about him with an
uncertain smile. But the little, clay-bespattered Italians were still
sleeping, the slatternly women across the aisle were in open-mouthed
oblivion, and even the crumby, crying babies were for the nonce stilled.
Paul settled back to struggle with his impatience as best he could.

When he arrived at the Jersey City station he hurried through his
breakfast, manifestly ill at ease and keeping a sharp eye about him.
After he reached the Twenty-third Street station, he consulted a cabman
and had himself driven to a men's-furnishings establishment that was
just opening for the day. He spent upward of two hours there, buying
with endless reconsidering and great care. His new street suit he put
on in the fitting room; the frock coat and dress clothes he had bundled
into the cab with his linen. Then he drove to a hatter's and a shoe
house. His next errand was at Tiffany's, where he selected his silver
and a new scarf pin. He would not wait to have his silver marked,
he said. Lastly, he stopped at a trunk shop on Broadway and had his
purchases packed into various traveling bags.

It was a little after one o'clock when he drove up to the Waldorf, and
after settling with the cabman, went into the office. He registered from
Washington; said his mother and father had been abroad, and that he
had come down to await the arrival of their steamer. He told his story
plausibly and had no trouble, since he volunteered to pay for them in
advance, in engaging his rooms; a sleeping room, sitting room, and bath.

Not once, but a hundred times, Paul had planned this entry into New
York. He had gone over every detail of it with Charley Edwards, and in
his scrapbook at home there were pages of description about New York
hotels, cut from the Sunday papers. When he was shown to his sitting
room on the eighth floor he saw at a glance that everything was as it
should be; there was but one detail in his mental picture that the
place did not realize, so he rang for the bellboy and sent him down for
flowers. He moved about nervously until the boy returned, putting
away his new linen and fingering it delightedly as he did so. When the
flowers came he put them hastily into water, and then tumbled into a hot
bath. Presently he came out of his white bathroom, resplendent in his
new silk underwear, and playing with the tassels of his red robe. The
snow was whirling so fiercely outside his windows that he could scarcely
see across the street, but within the air was deliciously soft and
fragrant. He put the violets and jonquils on the taboret beside the
couch, and threw himself down, with a long sigh, covering himself with
a Roman blanket. He was thoroughly tired; he had been in such haste,
he had stood up to such a strain, covered so much ground in the last
twenty-four hours, that he wanted to think how it had all come about.
Lulled by the sound of the wind, the warm air, and the cool fragrance of
the flowers, he sank into deep, drowsy retrospection.

It had been wonderfully simple; when they had shut him out of the
theater and concert hall, when they had taken away his bone, the
whole thing was virtually determined. The rest was a mere matter of
opportunity. The only thing that at all surprised him was his own
courage--for he realized well enough that he had always been tormented by
fear, a sort of apprehensive dread that, of late years, as the meshes of
the lies he had told closed about him, had been pulling the muscles of
his body tighter and tighter. Until now he could not remember the time
when he had not been dreading something. Even when he was a little boy
it was always there--behind him, or before, or on either side. There had
always been the shadowed corner, the dark place into which he dared not
look, but from which something seemed always to be watching him--and
Paul had done things that were not pretty to watch, he knew.

But now he had a curious sense of relief, as though he had at last
thrown down the gauntlet to the thing in the corner.

Yet it was but a day since he had been sulking in the traces; but
yesterday afternoon that he had been sent to the bank with Denny &
Carson's deposit, as usual--but this time he was instructed to leave the
book to be balanced. There was above two thousand dollars in checks, and
nearly a thousand in the bank notes which he had taken from the book
and quietly transferred to his pocket. At the bank he had made out a
new deposit slip. His nerves had been steady enough to permit of his
returning to the office, where he had finished his work and asked for
a full day's holiday tomorrow, Saturday, giving a perfectly reasonable
pretext. The bankbook, he knew, would not be returned before Monday or
Tuesday, and his father would be out of town for the next week. From
the time he slipped the bank notes into his pocket until he boarded the
night train for New York, he had not known a moment's hesitation. It was
not the first time Paul had steered through treacherous waters.

How astonishingly easy it had all been; here he was, the thing done;
and this time there would be no awakening, no figure at the top of the
stairs. He watched the snowflakes whirling by his window until he fell
asleep.

When he awoke, it was three o'clock in the afternoon. He bounded up with
a start; half of one of his precious days gone already! He spent more
than an hour in dressing, watching every stage of his toilet carefully
in the mirror. Everything was quite perfect; he was exactly the kind of
boy he had always wanted to be.

When he went downstairs Paul took a carriage and drove up Fifth Avenue
toward the Park. The snow had somewhat abated; carriages and tradesmen's
wagons were hurrying soundlessly to and fro in the winter twilight; boys
in woolen mufflers were shoveling off the doorsteps; the avenue stages
made fine spots of color against the white street. Here and there on
the corners were stands, with whole flower gardens blooming under glass
cases, against the sides of which the snowflakes stuck and melted;
violets, roses, carnations, lilies of the valley--somehow vastly more
lovely and alluring that they blossomed thus unnaturally in the snow.
The Park itself was a wonderful stage winterpiece.

When he returned, the pause of the twilight had ceased and the tune of
the streets had changed. The snow was falling faster, lights streamed
from the hotels that reared their dozen stories fearlessly up into
the storm, defying the raging Atlantic winds. A long, black stream of
carriages poured down the avenue, intersected here and there by other
streams, tending horizontally. There were a score of cabs about the
entrance of his hotel, and his driver had to wait. Boys in livery were
running in and out of the awning stretched across the sidewalk, up and
down the red velvet carpet laid from the door to the street. Above,
about, within it all was the rumble and roar, the hurry and toss of
thousands of human beings as hot for pleasure as himself, and on every
side of him towered the glaring affirmation of the omnipotence of
wealth.

The boy set his teeth and drew his shoulders together in a spasm of
realization; the plot of all dramas, the text of all romances,
the nerve-stuff of all sensations was whirling about him like the
snowflakes. He burnt like a faggot in a tempest.

When Paul went down to dinner the music of the orchestra came floating
up the elevator shaft to greet him. His head whirled as he stepped into
the thronged corridor, and he sank back into one of the chairs against
the wall to get his breath. The lights, the chatter, the perfumes, the
bewildering medley of color--he had, for a moment, the feeling of
not being able to stand it. But only for a moment; these were his own
people, he told himself. He went slowly about the corridors, through
the writing rooms, smoking rooms, reception rooms, as though he were
exploring the chambers of an enchanted palace, built and peopled for him
alone.

When he reached the dining room he sat down at a table near a window.
The flowers, the white linen, the many-colored wineglasses, the gay
toilettes of the women, the low popping of corks, the undulating
repetitions of the _Blue Danube_ from the orchestra, all flooded Paul's
dream with bewildering radiance. When the roseate tinge of his champagne
was added--that cold, precious, bubbling stuff that creamed and foamed
in his glass--Paul wondered that there were honest men in the world at
all. This was what all the world was fighting for, he reflected; this
was what all the struggle was about. He doubted the reality of his
past. Had he ever known a place called Cordelia Street, a place where
fagged-looking businessmen got on the early car; mere rivets in a
machine they seemed to Paul,--sickening men, with combings of children's
hair always hanging to their coats, and the smell of cooking in their
clothes. Cordelia Street--Ah, that belonged to another time and country;
had he not always been thus, had he not sat here night after night,
from as far back as he could remember, looking pensively over just such
shimmering textures and slowly twirling the stem of a glass like this
one between his thumb and middle finger ? He rather thought he had.

He was not in the least abashed or lonely. He had no especial desire to
meet or to know any of these people; all he demanded was the right to
look on and conjecture, to watch the pageant. The mere stage properties
were all he contended for. Nor was he lonely later in the evening, in
his lodge at the Metropolitan. He was now entirely rid of his nervous
misgivings, of his forced aggressiveness, of the imperative desire
to show himself different from his surroundings. He felt now that his
surroundings explained him. Nobody questioned the purple; he had only to
wear it passively. He had only to glance down at his attire to reassure
himself that here it would be impossible for anyone to humiliate him.

He found it hard to leave his beautiful sitting room to go to bed that
night, and sat long watching the raging storm from his turret window.
When he went to sleep it was with the lights turned on in his bedroom;
partly because of his old timidity, and partly so that, if he should
wake in the night, there would be no wretched moment of doubt, no
horrible suspicion of yellow wallpaper, or of Washington and Calvin
above his bed.

Sunday morning the city was practically snowbound. Paul breakfasted
late, and in the afternoon he fell in with a wild San Francisco boy,
a freshman at Yale, who said he had run down for a “little flyer” over
Sunday. The young man offered to show Paul the night side of the town,
and the two boys went out together after dinner, not returning to the
hotel until seven o'clock the next morning. They had started out in the
confiding warmth of a champagne friendship, but their parting in the
elevator was singularly cool. The freshman pulled himself together to
make his train, and Paul went to bed. He awoke at two o'clock in the
afternoon, very thirsty and dizzy, and rang for icewater, coffee, and
the Pittsburgh papers.

On the part of the hotel management, Paul excited no suspicion. There
was this to be said for him, that he wore his spoils with dignity and in
no way made himself conspicuous. Even under the glow of his wine he was
never boisterous, though he found the stuff like a magician's wand for
wonder-building. His chief greediness lay in his ears and eyes, and his
excesses were not offensive ones. His dearest pleasures were the
gray winter twilights in his sitting room; his quiet enjoyment of his
flowers, his clothes, his wide divan, his cigarette, and his sense of
power. He could not remember a time when he had felt so at peace with
himself. The mere release from the necessity of petty lying, lying every
day and every day, restored his self-respect. He had never lied for
pleasure, even at school; but to be noticed and admired, to assert his
difference from other Cordelia Street boys; and he felt a good deal
more manly, more honest, even, now that he had no need for boastful
pretensions, now that he could, as his actor friends used to say, “dress
the part.” It was characteristic that remorse did not occur to him. His
golden days went by without a shadow, and he made each as perfect as he
could.

On the eighth day after his arrival in New York he found the whole
affair exploited in the Pittsburgh papers, exploited with a wealth of
detail which indicated that local news of a sensational nature was at a
low ebb. The firm of Denny & Carson announced that the boy's father had
refunded the full amount of the theft and that they had no intention of
prosecuting. The Cumberland minister had been interviewed, and expressed
his hope of yet reclaiming the motherless lad, and his Sabbath-school
teacher declared that she would spare no effort to that end. The rumor
had reached Pittsburgh that the boy had been seen in a New York hotel,
and his father had gone East to find him and bring him home.

Paul had just come in to dress for dinner; he sank into a chair, weak
to the knees, and clasped his head in his hands. It was to be worse than
jail, even; the tepid waters of Cordelia Street were to close over him
finally and forever. The gray monotony stretched before him in
hopeless, unrelieved years; Sabbath school, Young People's Meeting, the
yellow-papered room, the damp dishtowels; it all rushed back upon him
with a sickening vividness. He had the old feeling that the orchestra
had suddenly stopped, the sinking sensation that the play was over. The
sweat broke out on his face, and he sprang to his feet, looked about him
with his white, conscious smile, and winked at himself in the mirror,
With something of the old childish belief in miracles with which he
had so often gone to class, all his lessons unlearned, Paul dressed and
dashed whistling down the corridor to the elevator.

He had no sooner entered the dining room and caught the measure of the
music than his remembrance was lightened by his old elastic power of
claiming the moment, mounting with it, and finding it all-sufficient.
The glare and glitter about him, the mere scenic accessories had again,
and for the last time, their old potency. He would show himself that he
was game, he would finish the thing splendidly. He doubted, more than
ever, the existence of Cordelia Street, and for the first time he drank
his wine recklessly. Was he not, after all, one of those fortunate
beings born to the purple, was he not still himself and in his own
place ? He drummed a nervous accompaniment to the Pagliacci music and
looked about him, telling himself over and over that it had paid.

He reflected drowsily, to the swell of the music and the chill sweetness
of his wine, that he might have done it more wisely. He might have
caught an outbound steamer and been well out of their clutches before
now. But the other side of the world had seemed too far away and too
uncertain then; he could not have waited for it; his need had been
too sharp. If he had to choose over again, he would do the same thing
tomorrow. He looked affectionately about the dining room, now gilded
with a soft mist. Ah, it had paid indeed!

Paul was awakened next morning by a painful throbbing in his head and
feet. He had thrown himself across the bed without undressing, and had
slept with his shoes on. His limbs and hands were lead heavy, and his
tongue and throat were parched and burnt. There came upon him one of
those fateful attacks of clearheadedness that never occurred except when
he was physically exhausted and his nerves hung loose. He lay still,
closed his eyes, and let the tide of things wash over him.

His father was in New York; “stopping at some joint or other,” he told
himself. The memory of successive summers on the front stoop fell upon
him like a weight of black water. He had not a hundred dollars left; and
he knew now, more than ever, that money was everything, the wall that
stood between all he loathed and all he wanted. The thing was winding
itself up; he had thought of that on his first glorious day in New York,
and had even provided a way to snap the thread. It lay on his dressing
table now; he had got it out last night when he came blindly up from
dinner, but the shiny metal hurt his eyes, and he disliked the looks of
it.

He rose and moved about with a painful effort, succumbing now and again
to attacks of nausea. It was the old depression exaggerated; all the
world had become Cordelia Street. Yet somehow he was not afraid of
anything, was absolutely calm; perhaps because he had looked into the
dark corner at last and knew. It was bad enough, what he saw there, but
somehow not so bad as his long fear of it had been. He saw everything
clearly now. He had a feeling that he had made the best of it, that he
had lived the sort of life he was meant to live, and for half an hour he
sat staring at the revolver. But he told himself that was not the way,
so he went downstairs and took a cab to the ferry.

When Paul arrived in Newark he got off the train and took another cab,
directing the driver to follow the Pennsylvania tracks out of the town.
The snow lay heavy on the roadways and had drifted deep in the open
fields. Only here and there the dead grass or dried weed stalks
projected, singularly black, above it. Once well into the country, Paul
dismissed the carriage and walked, floundering along the tracks, his
mind a medley of irrelevant things. He seemed to hold in his brain an
actual picture of everything he had seen that morning. He remembered
every feature of both his drivers, of the toothless old woman from whom
he had bought the red flowers in his coat, the agent from whom he had
got his ticket, and all of his fellow passengers on the ferry. His mind,
unable to cope with vital matters near at hand, worked feverishly and
deftly at sorting and grouping these images. They made for him a part
of the ugliness of the world, of the ache in his head, and the bitter
burning on his tongue. He stooped and put a handful of snow into his
mouth as he walked, but that, too, seemed hot. When he reached a little
hillside, where the tracks ran through a cut some twenty feet below him,
he stopped and sat down.

The carnations in his coat were drooping with the cold, he noticed,
their red glory all over. It occurred to him that all the flowers he had
seen in the glass cases that first night must have gone the same way,
long before this. It was only one splendid breath they had, in spite of
their brave mockery at the winter outside the glass; and it was a losing
game in the end, it seemed, this revolt against the homilies by which
the world is run. Paul took one of the blossoms carefully from his coat
and scooped a little hole in the snow, where he covered it up. Then he
dozed awhile, from his weak condition, seemingly insensible to the cold.

The sound of an approaching train awoke him, and he started to his feet,
remembering only his resolution, and afraid lest he should be too late.
He stood watching the approaching locomotive, his teeth chattering,
his lips drawn away from them in a frightened smile; once or twice he
glanced nervously sidewise, as though he were being watched. When
the right moment came, he jumped. As he fell, the folly of his haste
occurred to him with merciless clearness, the vastness of what he had
left undone. There flashed through his brain, clearer than ever before,
the blue of Adriatic water, the yellow of Algerian sands.

He felt something strike his chest, and that his body was being thrown
swiftly through the air, on and on, immeasurably far and fast, while his
limbs were gently relaxed. Then, because the picture-making mechanism
was crushed, the disturbing visions flashed into black, and Paul dropped
back into the immense design of things.

YOUTH AND THE BRIGHT MEDUSA


"We must not look at Goblin men,
We must not buy their fruits;
Who knows upon what soil they fed
Their hungry, thirsty roots ?"




CONTENTS


COMING, APHRODITE!

THE DIAMOND MINE

A GOLD SLIPPER

SCANDAL

PAUL'S CASE

A WAGNER MATINÉE

THE SCULPTOR'S FUNERAL

"A DEATH IN THE DESERT"




The author wishes to thank _McClure's Magazine_, _The Century
Magazine_ and _Harper's Magazine_ for their courtesy in permitting
the re-publication of three stories in this collection.

The last four stories in the volume, _Paul's Case_, _A Wagner Matinée_,
_The Sculptor's Funeral_, "_A Death in the Desert_," are re-printed from
the author's first book of stories, entitled "The Troll Garden,"
published in 1905.





Coming, Aphrodite!


I

Don Hedger had lived for four years on the top floor of an old house on
the south side of Washington Square, and nobody had ever disturbed him.
He occupied one big room with no outside exposure except on the north,
where he had built in a many-paned studio window that looked upon a court
and upon the roofs and walls of other buildings. His room was very
cheerless, since he never got a ray of direct sunlight; the south corners
were always in shadow. In one of the corners was a clothes closet, built
against the partition, in another a wide divan, serving as a seat by day
and a bed by night. In the front corner, the one farther from the window,
was a sink, and a table with two gas burners where he sometimes cooked
his food. There, too, in the perpetual dusk, was the dog's bed, and often
a bone or two for his comfort.

The dog was a Boston bull terrier, and Hedger explained his surly
disposition by the fact that he had been bred to the point where it told
on his nerves. His name was Caesar III, and he had taken prizes at very
exclusive dog shows. When he and his master went out to prowl about
University Place or to promenade along West Street, Caesar III was
invariably fresh and shining. His pink skin showed through his mottled
coat, which glistened as if it had just been rubbed with olive oil, and
he wore a brass-studded collar, bought at the smartest saddler's. Hedger,
as often as not, was hunched up in an old striped blanket coat, with a
shapeless felt hat pulled over his bushy hair, wearing black shoes that
had become grey, or brown ones that had become black, and he never put on
gloves unless the day was biting cold.

Early in May, Hedger learned that he was to have a new neighbour in the
rear apartment--two rooms, one large and one small, that faced the west.
His studio was shut off from the larger of these rooms by double doors,
which, though they were fairly tight, left him a good deal at the mercy
of the occupant. The rooms had been leased, long before he came there, by
a trained nurse who considered herself knowing in old furniture. She went
to auction sales and bought up mahogany and dirty brass and stored it
away here, where she meant to live when she retired from nursing.
Meanwhile, she sub-let her rooms, with their precious furniture, to young
people who came to New York to "write" or to "paint"--who proposed to
live by the sweat of the brow rather than of the hand, and who desired
artistic surroundings.

When Hedger first moved in, these rooms were occupied by a young man who
tried to write plays,--and who kept on trying until a week ago, when the
nurse had put him out for unpaid rent.

A few days after the playwright left, Hedger heard an ominous murmur of
voices through the bolted double doors: the lady-like intonation of the
nurse--doubtless exhibiting her treasures--and another voice, also a
woman's, but very different; young, fresh, unguarded, confident. All the
same, it would be very annoying to have a woman in there. The only
bath-room on the floor was at the top of the stairs in the front hall,
and he would always be running into her as he came or went from his bath.
He would have to be more careful to see that Caesar didn't leave bones
about the hall, too; and she might object when he cooked steak and onions
on his gas burner.

As soon as the talking ceased and the women left, he forgot them. He was
absorbed in a study of paradise fish at the Aquarium, staring out at
people through the glass and green water of their tank. It was a highly
gratifying idea; the incommunicability of one stratum of animal life with
another,--though Hedger pretended it was only an experiment in unusual
lighting. When he heard trunks knocking against the sides of the narrow
hall, then he realized that she was moving in at once. Toward noon,
groans and deep gasps and the creaking of ropes, made him aware that a
piano was arriving. After the tramp of the movers died away down the
stairs, somebody touched off a few scales and chords on the instrument,
and then there was peace. Presently he heard her lock her door and go
down the hall humming something; going out to lunch, probably. He stuck
his brushes in a can of turpentine and put on his hat, not stopping to
wash his hands. Caesar was smelling along the crack under the bolted
doors; his bony tail stuck out hard as a hickory withe, and the hair was
standing up about his elegant collar.

Hedger encouraged him. "Come along, Caesar. You'll soon get used to a new
smell."

In the hall stood an enormous trunk, behind the ladder that led to the
roof, just opposite Hedger's door. The dog flew at it with a growl of
hurt amazement. They went down three flights of stairs and out into the
brilliant May afternoon.

Behind the Square, Hedger and his dog descended into a basement oyster
house where there were no tablecloths on the tables and no handles on the
coffee cups, and the floor was covered with sawdust, and Caesar was
always welcome,--not that he needed any such precautionary flooring. All
the carpets of Persia would have been safe for him. Hedger ordered steak
and onions absentmindedly, not realizing why he had an apprehension that
this dish might be less readily at hand hereafter. While he ate, Caesar
sat beside his chair, gravely disturbing the sawdust with his tail.

After lunch Hedger strolled about the Square for the dog's health and
watched the stages pull out;--that was almost the very last summer of the
old horse stages on Fifth Avenue. The fountain had but lately begun
operations for the season and was throwing up a mist of rainbow water
which now and then blew south and sprayed a bunch of Italian babies that
were being supported on the outer rim by older, very little older,
brothers and sisters. Plump robins were hopping about on the soil; the
grass was newly cut and blindingly green. Looking up the Avenue through
the Arch, one could see the young poplars with their bright, sticky
leaves, and the Brevoort glistening in its spring coat of paint, and
shining horses and carriages,--occasionally an automobile, misshapen and
sullen, like an ugly threat in a stream of things that were bright and
beautiful and alive.

While Caesar and his master were standing by the fountain, a girl
approached them, crossing the Square. Hedger noticed her because she wore
a lavender cloth suit and carried in her arms a big bunch of fresh
lilacs. He saw that she was young and handsome,--beautiful, in fact, with
a splendid figure and good action. She, too, paused by the fountain and
looked back through the Arch up the Avenue. She smiled rather
patronizingly as she looked, and at the same time seemed delighted. Her
slowly curving upper lip and half-closed eyes seemed to say: "You're gay,
you're exciting, you are quite the right sort of thing; but you're none
too fine for me!"

In the moment she tarried, Caesar stealthily approached her and sniffed
at the hem of her lavender skirt, then, when she went south like an
arrow, he ran back to his master and lifted a face full of emotion and
alarm, his lower lip twitching under his sharp white teeth and his hazel
eyes pointed with a very definite discovery. He stood thus, motionless,
while Hedger watched the lavender girl go up the steps and through the
door of the house in which he lived.

"You're right, my boy, it's she! She might be worse looking, you know."

When they mounted to the studio, the new lodger's door, at the back of
the hall, was a little ajar, and Hedger caught the warm perfume of lilacs
just brought in out of the sun. He was used to the musty smell of the old
hall carpet. (The nurse-lessee had once knocked at his studio door and
complained that Caesar must be somewhat responsible for the particular
flavour of that mustiness, and Hedger had never spoken to her since.) He
was used to the old smell, and he preferred it to that of the lilacs, and
so did his companion, whose nose was so much more discriminating. Hedger
shut his door vehemently, and fell to work.

Most young men who dwell in obscure studios in New York have had a
beginning, come out of something, have somewhere a home town, a family, a
paternal roof. But Don Hedger had no such background. He was a foundling,
and had grown up in a school for homeless boys, where book-learning was a
negligible part of the curriculum. When he was sixteen, a Catholic priest
took him to Greensburg, Pennsylvania, to keep house for him. The priest
did something to fill in the large gaps in the boy's education,--taught
him to like "Don Quixote" and "The Golden Legend," and encouraged him to
mess with paints and crayons in his room up under the slope of the
mansard. When Don wanted to go to New York to study at the Art League,
the priest got him a night job as packer in one of the big department
stores. Since then, Hedger had taken care of himself; that was his only
responsibility. He was singularly unencumbered; had no family duties, no
social ties, no obligations toward any one but his landlord. Since he
travelled light, he had travelled rather far. He had got over a good deal
of the earth's surface, in spite of the fact that he never in his life
had more than three hundred dollars ahead at any one time, and he had
already outlived a succession of convictions and revelations about his
art.

Though he was now but twenty-six years old, he had twice been on the
verge of becoming a marketable product; once through some studies of New
York streets he did for a magazine, and once through a collection of
pastels he brought home from New Mexico, which Remington, then at the
height of his popularity, happened to see, and generously tried to push.
But on both occasions Hedger decided that this was something he didn't
wish to carry further,--simply the old thing over again and got
nowhere,--so he took enquiring dealers experiments in a "later manner,"
that made them put him out of the shop. When he ran short of money, he
could always get any amount of commercial work; he was an expert
draughtsman and worked with lightning speed. The rest of his time he
spent in groping his way from one kind of painting into another, or
travelling about without luggage, like a tramp, and he was chiefly
occupied with getting rid of ideas he had once thought very fine.

Hedger's circumstances, since he had moved to Washington Square, were
affluent compared to anything he had ever known before. He was now able
to pay advance rent and turn the key on his studio when he went away for
four months at a stretch. It didn't occur to him to wish to be richer
than this. To be sure, he did without a great many things other people
think necessary, but he didn't miss them, because he had never had them.
He belonged to no clubs, visited no houses, had no studio friends, and he
ate his dinner alone in some decent little restaurant, even on Christmas
and New Year's. For days together he talked to nobody but his dog and the
janitress and the lame oysterman.

After he shut the door and settled down to his paradise fish on that
first Tuesday in May, Hedger forgot all about his new neighbour. When the
light failed, he took Caesar out for a walk. On the way home he did his
marketing on West Houston Street, with a one-eyed Italian woman who
always cheated him. After he had cooked his beans and scallopini, and
drunk half a bottle of Chianti, he put his dishes in the sink and went up
on the roof to smoke. He was the only person in the house who ever went
to the roof, and he had a secret understanding with the janitress about
it. He was to have "the privilege of the roof," as she said, if he opened
the heavy trapdoor on sunny days to air out the upper hall, and was
watchful to close it when rain threatened. Mrs. Foley was fat and dirty
and hated to climb stairs,--besides, the roof was reached by a
perpendicular iron ladder, definitely inaccessible to a woman of her
bulk, and the iron door at the top of it was too heavy for any but
Hedger's strong arm to lift. Hedger was not above medium height, but he
practised with weights and dumb-bells, and in the shoulders he was as
strong as a gorilla.

So Hedger had the roof to himself. He and Caesar often slept up there on
hot nights, rolled in blankets he had brought home from Arizona. He
mounted with Caesar under his left arm. The dog had never learned to
climb a perpendicular ladder, and never did he feel so much his master's
greatness and his own dependence upon him, as when he crept under his arm
for this perilous ascent. Up there was even gravel to scratch in, and a
dog could do whatever he liked, so long as he did not bark. It was a kind
of Heaven, which no one was strong enough to reach but his great,
paint-smelling master.

On this blue May night there was a slender, girlish looking young moon in
the west, playing with a whole company of silver stars. Now and then one
of them darted away from the group and shot off into the gauzy blue with
a soft little trail of light, like laughter. Hedger and his dog were
delighted when a star did this. They were quite lost in watching the
glittering game, when they were suddenly diverted by a sound,--not
from the stars, though it was music. It was not the Prologue to
Pagliacci, which rose ever and anon on hot evenings from an Italian
tenement on Thompson Street, with the gasps of the corpulent baritone who
got behind it; nor was it the hurdy-gurdy man, who often played at the
corner in the balmy twilight. No, this was a woman's voice, singing the
tempestuous, over-lapping phrases of Signor Puccini, then comparatively
new in the world, but already so popular that even Hedger recognized his
unmistakable gusts of breath. He looked about over the roofs; all was
blue and still, with the well-built chimneys that were never used now
standing up dark and mournful. He moved softly toward the yellow
quadrangle where the gas from the hall shone up through the half-lifted
trapdoor. Oh yes! It came up through the hole like a strong draught, a
big, beautiful voice, and it sounded rather like a professional's. A
piano had arrived in the morning, Hedger remembered. This might be a very
great nuisance. It would be pleasant enough to listen to, if you could
turn it on and off as you wished; but you couldn't. Caesar, with the gas
light shining on his collar and his ugly but sensitive face, panted and
looked up for information. Hedger put down a reassuring hand.

"I don't know. We can't tell yet. It may not be so bad."

He stayed on the roof until all was still below, and finally descended,
with quite a new feeling about his neighbour. Her voice, like her figure,
inspired respect,--if one did not choose to call it admiration. Her door
was shut, the transom was dark; nothing remained of her but the obtrusive
trunk, unrightfully taking up room in the narrow hall.


II

For two days Hedger didn't see her. He was painting eight hours a day
just then, and only went out to hunt for food. He noticed that she
practised scales and exercises for about an hour in the morning; then she
locked her door, went humming down the hall, and left him in peace. He
heard her getting her coffee ready at about the same time he got his.
Earlier still, she passed his room on her way to her bath. In the evening
she sometimes sang, but on the whole she didn't bother him. When he was
working well he did not notice anything much. The morning paper lay
before his door until he reached out for his milk bottle, then he kicked
the sheet inside and it lay on the floor until evening. Sometimes
he read it and sometimes he did not. He forgot there was anything of
importance going on in the world outside of his third floor studio.
Nobody had ever taught him that he ought to be interested in other
people; in the Pittsburgh steel strike, in the Fresh Air Fund, in the
scandal about the Babies' Hospital. A grey wolf, living in a Wyoming
canyon, would hardly have been less concerned about these things than was
Don Hedger.

One morning he was coming out of the bathroom at the front end of the
hall, having just given Caesar his bath and rubbed him into a glow with a
heavy towel. Before the door, lying in wait for him, as it were, stood a
tall figure in a flowing blue silk dressing gown that fell away from her
marble arms. In her hands she carried various accessories of the bath.

"I wish," she said distinctly, standing in his way, "I wish you wouldn't
wash your dog in the tub. I never heard of such a thing! I've found his
hair in the tub, and I've smelled a doggy smell, and now I've caught you
at it. It's an outrage!"

Hedger was badly frightened. She was so tall and positive, and was fairly
blazing with beauty and anger. He stood blinking, holding on to his
sponge and dog-soap, feeling that he ought to bow very low to her. But
what he actually said was:

"Nobody has ever objected before. I always wash the tub,--and, anyhow,
he's cleaner than most people."

"Cleaner than me ?" her eyebrows went up, her white arms and neck and her
fragrant person seemed to scream at him like a band of outraged nymphs.
Something flashed through his mind about a man who was turned into a dog,
or was pursued by dogs, because he unwittingly intruded upon the bath of
beauty.

"No, I didn't mean that," he muttered, turning scarlet under the bluish
stubble of his muscular jaws. "But I know he's cleaner than I am."

"That I don't doubt!" Her voice sounded like a soft shivering of crystal,
and with a smile of pity she drew the folds of her voluminous blue robe
close about her and allowed the wretched man to pass. Even Caesar was
frightened; he darted like a streak down the hall, through the door and
to his own bed in the corner among the bones.

Hedger stood still in the doorway, listening to indignant sniffs and
coughs and a great swishing of water about the sides of the tub. He had
washed it; but as he had washed it with Caesar's sponge, it was quite
possible that a few bristles remained; the dog was shedding now. The
playwright had never objected, nor had the jovial illustrator who
occupied the front apartment,--but he, as he admitted, "was usually
pye-eyed, when he wasn't in Buffalo." He went home to Buffalo sometimes
to rest his nerves.

It had never occurred to Hedger that any one would mind using the tub
after Caesar;--but then, he had never seen a beautiful girl caparisoned
for the bath before. As soon as he beheld her standing there, he realized
the unfitness of it. For that matter, she ought not to step into a tub
that any other mortal had bathed in; the illustrator was sloppy and left
cigarette ends on the moulding.

All morning as he worked he was gnawed by a spiteful desire to get back
at her. It rankled that he had been so vanquished by her disdain. When he
heard her locking her door to go out for lunch, he stepped quickly into
the hall in his messy painting coat, and addressed her.

"I don't wish to be exigent, Miss,"--he had certain grand words that he
used upon occasion--"but if this is your trunk, it's rather in the way
here."

"Oh, very well!" she exclaimed carelessly, dropping her keys into her
handbag. "I'll have it moved when I can get a man to do it," and she went
down the hall with her free, roving stride.

Her name, Hedger discovered from her letters, which the postman left on
the table in the lower hall, was Eden Bower.


III

In the closet that was built against the partition separating his room
from Miss Bower's, Hedger kept all his wearing apparel, some of it on
hooks and hangers, some of it on the floor. When he opened his closet
door now-a-days, little dust-coloured insects flew out on downy wing, and
he suspected that a brood of moths were hatching in his winter overcoat.
Mrs. Foley, the janitress, told him to bring down all his heavy clothes
and she would give them a beating and hang them in the court. The closet
was in such disorder that he shunned the encounter, but one hot afternoon
he set himself to the task. First he threw out a pile of forgotten
laundry and tied it up in a sheet. The bundle stood as high as his middle
when he had knotted the corners. Then he got his shoes and overshoes
together. When he took his overcoat from its place against the partition,
a long ray of yellow light shot across the dark enclosure,--a knot hole,
evidently, in the high wainscoating of the west room. He had never
noticed it before, and without realizing what he was doing, he stooped
and squinted through it.

Yonder, in a pool of sunlight, stood his new neighbour, wholly unclad,
doing exercises of some sort before a long gilt mirror. Hedger did not
happen to think how unpardonable it was of him to watch her. Nudity was
not improper to any one who had worked so much from the figure, and he
continued to look, simply because he had never seen a woman's body so
beautiful as this one,--positively glorious in action. As she swung her
arms and changed from one pivot of motion to another, muscular energy
seemed to flow through her from her toes to her finger-tips. The soft
flush of exercise and the gold of afternoon sun played over her flesh
together, enveloped her in a luminous mist which, as she turned and
twisted, made now an arm, now a shoulder, now a thigh, dissolve in pure
light and instantly recover its outline with the next gesture. Hedger's
fingers curved as if he were holding a crayon; mentally he was doing the
whole figure in a single running line, and the charcoal seemed to explode
in his hand at the point where the energy of each gesture was discharged
into the whirling disc of light, from a foot or shoulder, from the
up-thrust chin or the lifted breasts.

He could not have told whether he watched her for six minutes or sixteen.
When her gymnastics were over, she paused to catch up a lock of hair that
had come down, and examined with solicitude a little reddish mole that
grew under her left arm-pit. Then, with her hand on her hip, she walked
unconcernedly across the room and disappeared through the door into her
bedchamber.

Disappeared--Don Hedger was crouching on his knees, staring at the golden
shower which poured in through the west windows, at the lake of gold
sleeping on the faded Turkish carpet. The spot was enchanted; a vision
out of Alexandria, out of the remote pagan past, had bathed itself there
in Helianthine fire.

When he crawled out of his closet, he stood blinking at the grey sheet
stuffed with laundry, not knowing what had happened to him. He felt a
little sick as he contemplated the bundle. Everything here was different;
he hated the disorder of the place, the grey prison light, his old shoes
and himself and all his slovenly habits. The black calico curtains that
ran on wires over his big window were white with dust. There were three
greasy frying pans in the sink, and the sink itself--He felt desperate.
He couldn't stand this another minute. He took up an armful of winter
clothes and ran down four flights into the basement.

"Mrs. Foley," he began, "I want my room cleaned this afternoon,
thoroughly cleaned. Can you get a woman for me right away ?"

"Is it company you're having ?" the fat, dirty janitress enquired. Mrs.
Foley was the widow of a useful Tammany man, and she owned real estate in
Flatbush. She was huge and soft as a feather bed. Her face and arms were
permanently coated with dust, grained like wood where the sweat had
trickled.

"Yes, company. That's it."

"Well, this is a queer time of the day to be asking for a cleaning woman.
It's likely I can get you old Lizzie, if she's not drunk. I'll send Willy
round to see."

Willy, the son of fourteen, roused from the stupor and stain of his fifth
box of cigarettes by the gleam of a quarter, went out. In five minutes he
returned with old Lizzie,--she smelling strong of spirits and wearing
several jackets which she had put on one over the other, and a number of
skirts, long and short, which made her resemble an animated dish-clout.
She had, of course, to borrow her equipment from Mrs. Foley, and toiled
up the long flights, dragging mop and pail and broom. She told Hedger to
be of good cheer, for he had got the right woman for the job, and showed
him a great leather strap she wore about her wrist to prevent dislocation
of tendons. She swished about the place, scattering dust and splashing
soapsuds, while he watched her in nervous despair. He stood over Lizzie
and made her scour the sink, directing her roughly, then paid her and got
rid of her. Shutting the door on his failure, he hurried off with his dog
to lose himself among the stevedores and dock labourers on West Street.

A strange chapter began for Don Hedger. Day after day, at that hour in
the afternoon, the hour before his neighbour dressed for dinner, he
crouched down in his closet to watch her go through her mysterious
exercises. It did not occur to him that his conduct was detestable; there
was nothing shy or retreating about this unclad girl,--a bold body,
studying itself quite coolly and evidently well pleased with itself,
doing all this for a purpose. Hedger scarcely regarded his action as
conduct at all; it was something that had happened to him. More than once
he went out and tried to stay away for the whole afternoon, but at about
five o'clock he was sure to find himself among his old shoes in the dark.
The pull of that aperture was stronger than his will,--and he had always
considered his will the strongest thing about him. When she threw herself
upon the divan and lay resting, he still stared, holding his breath. His
nerves were so on edge that a sudden noise made him start and brought out
the sweat on his forehead. The dog would come and tug at his sleeve,
knowing that something was wrong with his master. If he attempted a
mournful whine, those strong hands closed about his throat.

When Hedger came slinking out of his closet, he sat down on the edge of
the couch, sat for hours without moving. He was not painting at all now.
This thing, whatever it was, drank him up as ideas had sometimes done,
and he sank into a stupor of idleness as deep and dark as the stupor of
work. He could not understand it; he was no boy, he had worked from
models for years, and a woman's body was no mystery to him. Yet now he
did nothing but sit and think about one. He slept very little, and with
the first light of morning he awoke as completely possessed by this woman
as if he had been with her all the night before. The unconscious
operations of life went on in him only to perpetuate this excitement. His
brain held but one image now--vibrated, burned with it. It was a
heathenish feeling; without friendliness, almost without tenderness.

Women had come and gone in Hedger's life. Not having had a mother to
begin with, his relations with them, whether amorous or friendly, had
been casual. He got on well with janitresses and wash-women, with Indians
and with the peasant women of foreign countries. He had friends among the
silk-skirt factory girls who came to eat their lunch in Washington
Square, and he sometimes took a model for a day in the country. He felt
an unreasoning antipathy toward the well-dressed women he saw coming out
of big shops, or driving in the Park. If, on his way to the Art Museum,
he noticed a pretty girl standing on the steps of one of the houses on
upper Fifth Avenue, he frowned at her and went by with his shoulders
hunched up as if he were cold. He had never known such girls, or heard
them talk, or seen the inside of the houses in which they lived; but he
believed them all to be artificial and, in an aesthetic sense, perverted.
He saw them enslaved by desire of merchandise and manufactured articles,
effective only in making life complicated and insincere and in
embroidering it with ugly and meaningless trivialities. They were enough,
he thought, to make one almost forget woman as she existed in art, in
thought, and in the universe.

He had no desire to know the woman who had, for the time at least, so
broken up his life,--no curiosity about her every-day personality. He
shunned any revelation of it, and he listened for Miss Bower's coming and
going, not to encounter, but to avoid her. He wished that the girl who
wore shirt-waists and got letters from Chicago would keep out of his way,
that she did not exist. With her he had naught to make. But in a room
full of sun, before an old mirror, on a little enchanted rug of sleeping
colours, he had seen a woman who emerged naked through a door, and
disappeared naked. He thought of that body as never having been clad, or
as having worn the stuffs and dyes of all the centuries but his own. And
for him she had no geographical associations; unless with Crete, or
Alexandria, or Veronese's Venice. She was the immortal conception, the
perennial theme.

The first break in Hedger's lethargy occurred one afternoon when two
young men came to take Eden Bower out to dine. They went into her music
room, laughed and talked for a few minutes, and then took her away with
them. They were gone a long while, but he did not go out for food
himself; he waited for them to come back. At last he heard them coming
down the hall, gayer and more talkative than when they left. One of them
sat down at the piano, and they all began to sing. This Hedger found
absolutely unendurable. He snatched up his hat and went running down the
stairs. Caesar leaped beside him, hoping that old times were coming back.
They had supper in the oysterman's basement and then sat down in front of
their own doorway. The moon stood full over the Square, a thing of regal
glory; but Hedger did not see the moon; he was looking, murderously, for
men. Presently two, wearing straw hats and white trousers and carrying
canes, came down the steps from his house. He rose and dogged them across
the Square. They were laughing and seemed very much elated about
something. As one stopped to light a cigarette, Hedger caught from the
other:

"Don't you think she has a beautiful talent ?"

His companion threw away his match. "She has a beautiful figure." They
both ran to catch the stage.

Hedger went back to his studio. The light was shining from her transom.
For the first time he violated her privacy at night, and peered through
that fatal aperture. She was sitting, fully dressed, in the window,
smoking a cigarette and looking out over the housetops. He watched her
until she rose, looked about her with a disdainful, crafty smile, and
turned out the light.

The next morning, when Miss Bower went out, Hedger followed her. Her
white skirt gleamed ahead of him as she sauntered about the Square. She
sat down behind the Garibaldi statue and opened a music book she carried.
She turned the leaves carelessly, and several times glanced in his
direction. He was on the point of going over to her, when she rose
quickly and looked up at the sky. A flock of pigeons had risen from
somewhere in the crowded Italian quarter to the south, and were wheeling
rapidly up through the morning air, soaring and dropping, scattering and
coming together, now grey, now white as silver, as they caught or
intercepted the sunlight. She put up her hand to shade her eyes and
followed them with a kind of defiant delight in her face.

Hedger came and stood beside her. "You've surely seen them before ?"

"Oh, yes," she replied, still looking up. "I see them every day from my
windows. They always come home about five o'clock. Where do they live ?"

"I don't know. Probably some Italian raises them for the market. They
were here long before I came, and I've been here four years."

"In that same gloomy room ? Why didn't you take mine when it was vacant ?"

"It isn't gloomy. That's the best light for painting."

"Oh, is it ? I don't know anything about painting. I'd like to see your
pictures sometime. You have such a lot in there. Don't they get dusty,
piled up against the wall like that ?"

"Not very. I'd be glad to show them to you. Is your name really Eden
Bower ? I've seen your letters on the table."

"Well, it's the name I'm going to sing under. My father's name is Bowers,
but my friend Mr. Jones, a Chicago newspaper man who writes about music,
told me to drop the 's.' He's crazy about my voice."

Miss Bower didn't usually tell the whole story,--about anything. Her
first name, when she lived in Huntington, Illinois, was Edna, but Mr.
Jones had persuaded her to change it to one which he felt would be worthy
of her future. She was quick to take suggestions, though she told him she
"didn't see what was the matter with 'Edna.'"

She explained to Hedger that she was going to Paris to study. She was
waiting in New York for Chicago friends who were to take her over, but
who had been detained. "Did you study in Paris ?" she asked.

"No, I've never been in Paris. But I was in the south of France all last
summer, studying with C----. He's the biggest man among the moderns,--at
least I think so."

Miss Bower sat down and made room for him on the bench. "Do tell me about
it. I expected to be there by this time, and I can't wait to find out
what it's like."

Hedger began to relate how he had seen some of this Frenchman's work in
an exhibition, and deciding at once that this was the man for him, he had
taken a boat for Marseilles the next week, going over steerage. He
proceeded at once to the little town on the coast where his painter
lived, and presented himself. The man never took pupils, but because
Hedger had come so far, he let him stay. Hedger lived at the master's
house and every day they went out together to paint, sometimes on the
blazing rocks down by the sea. They wrapped themselves in light woollen
blankets and didn't feel the heat. Being there and working with C---- was
being in Paradise, Hedger concluded; he learned more in three months than
in all his life before.

Eden Bower laughed. "You're a funny fellow. Didn't you do anything but
work ? Are the women very beautiful ? Did you have awfully good things to
eat and drink ?"

Hedger said some of the women were fine looking, especially one girl who
went about selling fish and lobsters. About the food there was nothing
remarkable,--except the ripe figs, he liked those. They drank sour wine,
and used goat-butter, which was strong and full of hair, as it was
churned in a goat skin.

"But don't they have parties or banquets ? Aren't there any fine hotels
down there ?"

"Yes, but they are all closed in summer, and the country people are poor.
It's a beautiful country, though."

"How, beautiful ?" she persisted.

"If you want to go in, I'll show you some sketches, and you'll see."

Miss Bower rose. "All right. I won't go to my fencing lesson this
morning. Do you fence ? Here comes your dog. You can't move but he's after
you. He always makes a face at me when I meet him in the hall, and shows
his nasty little teeth as if he wanted to bite me."

In the studio Hedger got out his sketches, but to Miss Bower, whose
favourite pictures were Christ Before Pilate and a redhaired Magdalen of
Henner, these landscapes were not at all beautiful, and they gave her no
idea of any country whatsoever. She was careful not to commit herself,
however. Her vocal teacher had already convinced her that she had a great
deal to learn about many things.

"Why don't we go out to lunch somewhere ?" Hedger asked, and began to dust
his fingers with a handkerchief--which he got out of sight as swiftly as
possible.

"All right, the Brevoort," she said carelessly. "I think that's a good
place, and they have good wine. I don't care for cocktails."

Hedger felt his chin uneasily. "I'm afraid I haven't shaved this morning.
If you could wait for me in the Square ? It won't take me ten minutes."

Left alone, he found a clean collar and handkerchief, brushed his coat
and blacked his shoes, and last of all dug up ten dollars from the bottom
of an old copper kettle he had brought from Spain. His winter hat was of
such a complexion that the Brevoort hall boy winked at the porter as he
took it and placed it on the rack in a row of fresh straw ones.


IV

That afternoon Eden Bower was lying on the couch in her music room, her
face turned to the window, watching the pigeons. Reclining thus she could
see none of the neighbouring roofs, only the sky itself and the birds
that crossed and recrossed her field of vision, white as scraps of paper
blowing in the wind. She was thinking that she was young and handsome and
had had a good lunch, that a very easy-going, light-hearted city lay in
the streets below her; and she was wondering why she found this queer
painter chap, with his lean, bluish cheeks and heavy black eyebrows, more
interesting than the smart young men she met at her teacher's studio.

Eden Bower was, at twenty, very much the same person that we all know her
to be at forty, except that she knew a great deal less. But one thing she
knew: that she was to be Eden Bower. She was like some one standing
before a great show window full of beautiful and costly things, deciding
which she will order. She understands that they will not all be delivered
immediately, but one by one they will arrive at her door. She already
knew some of the many things that were to happen to her; for instance,
that the Chicago millionaire who was going to take her abroad with his
sister as chaperone, would eventually press his claim in quite another
manner. He was the most circumspect of bachelors, afraid of everything
obvious, even of women who were too flagrantly handsome. He was a nervous
collector of pictures and furniture, a nervous patron of music, and a
nervous host; very cautious about his health, and about any course of
conduct that might make him ridiculous. But she knew that he would at
last throw all his precautions to the winds.

People like Eden Bower are inexplicable. Her father sold farming
machinery in Huntington, Illinois, and she had grown up with no
acquaintances or experiences outside of that prairie town. Yet from her
earliest childhood she had not one conviction or opinion in common with
the people about her,--the only people she knew. Before she was out of
short dresses she had made up her mind that she was going to be an
actress, that she would live far away in great cities, that she would be
much admired by men and would have everything she wanted. When she was
thirteen, and was already singing and reciting for church entertainments,
she read in some illustrated magazine a long article about the late Czar
of Russia, then just come to the throne or about to come to it. After
that, lying in the hammock on the front porch on summer evenings, or
sitting through a long sermon in the family pew, she amused herself by
trying to make up her mind whether she would or would not be the Czar's
mistress when she played in his Capital. Now Edna had met this
fascinating word only in the novels of Ouida,--her hard-worked little
mother kept a long row of them in the upstairs storeroom, behind the
linen chest. In Huntington, women who bore that relation to men were
called by a very different name, and their lot was not an enviable one;
of all the shabby and poor, they were the shabbiest. But then, Edna had
never lived in Huntington, not even before she began to find books like
"Sapho" and "Mademoiselle de Maupin," secretly sold in paper covers
throughout Illinois. It was as if she had come into Huntington, into the
Bowers family, on one of the trains that puffed over the marshes behind
their back fence all day long, and was waiting for another train to take
her out.

As she grew older and handsomer, she had many beaux, but these small-town
boys didn't interest her. If a lad kissed her when he brought her home
from a dance, she was indulgent and she rather liked it. But if he
pressed her further, she slipped away from him, laughing. After she began
to sing in Chicago, she was consistently discreet. She stayed as a guest
in rich people's houses, and she knew that she was being watched like a
rabbit in a laboratory. Covered up in bed, with the lights out, she
thought her own thoughts, and laughed.

This summer in New York was her first taste of freedom. The Chicago
capitalist, after all his arrangements were made for sailing, had been
compelled to go to Mexico to look after oil interests. His sister knew
an excellent singing master in New York. Why should not a discreet,
well-balanced girl like Miss Bower spend the summer there, studying
quietly ? The capitalist suggested that his sister might enjoy a summer on
Long Island; he would rent the Griffith's place for her, with all the
servants, and Eden could stay there. But his sister met this proposal
with a cold stare. So it fell out, that between selfishness and greed,
Eden got a summer all her own,--which really did a great deal toward
making her an artist and whatever else she was afterward to become. She
had time to look about, to watch without being watched; to select
diamonds in one window and furs in another, to select shoulders and
moustaches in the big hotels where she went to lunch. She had the easy
freedom of obscurity and the consciousness of power. She enjoyed both.
She was in no hurry.

While Eden Bower watched the pigeons, Don Hedger sat on the other side of
the bolted doors, looking into a pool of dark turpentine, at his idle
brushes, wondering why a woman could do this to him. He, too, was sure of
his future and knew that he was a chosen man. He could not know, of
course, that he was merely the first to fall under a fascination which
was to be disastrous to a few men and pleasantly stimulating to many
thousands. Each of these two young people sensed the future, but not
completely. Don Hedger knew that nothing much would ever happen to him.
Eden Bower understood that to her a great deal would happen. But she did
not guess that her neighbour would have more tempestuous adventures
sitting in his dark studio than she would find in all the capitals of
Europe, or in all the latitude of conduct she was prepared to permit
herself.


V

One Sunday morning Eden was crossing the Square with a spruce young man
in a white flannel suit and a panama hat. They had been breakfasting at
the Brevoort and he was coaxing her to let him come up to her rooms and
sing for an hour.

"No, I've got to write letters. You must run along now. I see a friend of
mine over there, and I want to ask him about something before I go up."

"That fellow with the dog ? Where did you pick him up ?" the young man
glanced toward the seat under a sycamore where Hedger was reading the
morning paper.

"Oh, he's an old friend from the West," said Eden easily. "I won't
introduce you, because he doesn't like people. He's a recluse. Good-bye.
I can't be sure about Tuesday. I'll go with you if I have time after my
lesson." She nodded, left him, and went over to the seat littered with
newspapers. The young man went up the Avenue without looking back.

"Well, what are you going to do today ? Shampoo this animal all morning ?"
Eden enquired teasingly.

Hedger made room for her on the seat. "No, at twelve o'clock I'm going
out to Coney Island. One of my models is going up in a balloon this
afternoon. I've often promised to go and see her, and now I'm going."

Eden asked if models usually did such stunts. No, Hedger told her, but
Molly Welch added to her earnings in that way. "I believe," he added,
"she likes the excitement of it. She's got a good deal of spirit. That's
why I like to paint her. So many models have flaccid bodies."

"And she hasn't, eh ? Is she the one who comes to see you ? I can't help
hearing her, she talks so loud."

"Yes, she has a rough voice, but she's a fine girl. I don't suppose you'd
be interested in going ?"

"I don't know," Eden sat tracing patterns on the asphalt with the end of
her parasol. "Is it any fun ? I got up feeling I'd like to do something
different today. It's the first Sunday I've not had to sing in church. I
had that engagement for breakfast at the Brevoort, but it wasn't very
exciting. That chap can't talk about anything but himself."

Hedger warmed a little. "If you've never been to Coney Island, you ought
to go. It's nice to see all the people; tailors and bar-tenders and
prize-fighters with their best girls, and all sorts of folks taking a
holiday."

Eden looked sidewise at him. So one ought to be interested in people of
that kind, ought one ? He was certainly a funny fellow. Yet he was never,
somehow, tiresome. She had seen a good deal of him lately, but she kept
wanting to know him better, to find out what made him different from men
like the one she had just left--whether he really was as different as he
seemed. "I'll go with you," she said at last, "if you'll leave that at
home." She pointed to Caesar's flickering ears with her sunshade.

"But he's half the fun. You'd like to hear him bark at the waves when
they come in."

"No, I wouldn't. He's jealous and disagreeable if he sees you talking to
any one else. Look at him now."

"Of course, if you make a face at him. He knows what that means, and he
makes a worse face. He likes Molly Welch, and she'll be disappointed if I
don't bring him."

Eden said decidedly that he couldn't take both of them. So at twelve
o'clock when she and Hedger got on the boat at Desbrosses street, Caesar
was lying on his pallet, with a bone.

Eden enjoyed the boat-ride. It was the first time she had been on the
water, and she felt as if she were embarking for France. The light warm
breeze and the plunge of the waves made her very wide awake, and she
liked crowds of any kind. They went to the balcony of a big, noisy
restaurant and had a shore dinner, with tall steins of beer. Hedger had
got a big advance from his advertising firm since he first lunched with
Miss Bower ten days ago, and he was ready for anything.

After dinner they went to the tent behind the bathing beach, where the
tops of two balloons bulged out over the canvas. A red-faced man in a
linen suit stood in front of the tent, shouting in a hoarse voice and
telling the people that if the crowd was good for five dollars more, a
beautiful young woman would risk her life for their entertainment. Four
little boys in dirty red uniforms ran about taking contributions in their
pillbox hats. One of the balloons was bobbing up and down in its tether
and people were shoving forward to get nearer the tent.

"Is it dangerous, as he pretends ?" Eden asked.

"Molly says it's simple enough if nothing goes wrong with the balloon.
Then it would be all over, I suppose."

"Wouldn't you like to go up with her ?"

"I ? Of course not. I'm not fond of taking foolish risks."

Eden sniffed. "I shouldn't think sensible risks would be very much fun."

Hedger did not answer, for just then every one began to shove the other
way and shout, "Look out. There she goes!" and a band of six pieces
commenced playing furiously.

As the balloon rose from its tent enclosure, they saw a girl in green
tights standing in the basket, holding carelessly to one of the ropes
with one hand and with the other waving to the spectators. A long rope
trailed behind to keep the balloon from blowing out to sea.

As it soared, the figure in green tights in the basket diminished to a
mere spot, and the balloon itself, in the brilliant light, looked like a
big silver-grey bat, with its wings folded. When it began to sink, the
girl stepped through the hole in the basket to a trapeze that hung below,
and gracefully descended through the air, holding to the rod with both
hands, keeping her body taut and her feet close together. The crowd,
which had grown very large by this time, cheered vociferously. The men
took off their hats and waved, little boys shouted, and fat old women,
shining with the heat and a beer lunch, murmured admiring comments upon
the balloonist's figure. "Beautiful legs, she has!"

"That's so," Hedger whispered. "Not many girls would look well in that
position." Then, for some reason, he blushed a slow, dark, painful
crimson.

The balloon descended slowly, a little way from the tent, and the
red-faced man in the linen suit caught Molly Welch before her feet
touched the ground, and pulled her to one side. The band struck up "Blue
Bell" by way of welcome, and one of the sweaty pages ran forward and
presented the balloonist with a large bouquet of artificial flowers. She
smiled and thanked him, and ran back across the sand to the tent.

"Can't we go inside and see her ?" Eden asked. "You can explain to the
door man. I want to meet her." Edging forward, she herself addressed the
man in the linen suit and slipped something from her purse into his hand.

They found Molly seated before a trunk that had a mirror in the lid and a
"make-up" outfit spread upon the tray. She was wiping the cold cream and
powder from her neck with a discarded chemise.

"Hello, Don," she said cordially. "Brought a friend ?"

Eden liked her. She had an easy, friendly manner, and there was something
boyish and devil-may-care about her.

"Yes, it's fun. I'm mad about it," she said in reply to Eden's questions.
"I always want to let go, when I come down on the bar. You don't feel
your weight at all, as you would on a stationary trapeze."

The big drum boomed outside, and the publicity man began shouting to
newly arrived boatloads. Miss Welch took a last pull at her cigarette.
"Now you'll have to get out, Don. I change for the next act. This time I
go up in a black evening dress, and lose the skirt in the basket before I
start down."

"Yes, go along," said Eden. "Wait for me outside the door. I'll stay and
help her dress."

Hedger waited and waited, while women of every build bumped into him and
begged his pardon, and the red pages ran about holding out their caps for
coins, and the people ate and perspired and shifted parasols against the
sun. When the band began to play a two-step, all the bathers ran up out
of the surf to watch the ascent. The second balloon bumped and rose, and
the crowd began shouting to the girl in a black evening dress who stood
leaning against the ropes and smiling. "It's a new girl," they called.
"It ain't the Countess this time. You're a peach, girlie!"

The balloonist acknowledged these compliments, bowing and looking down
over the sea of upturned faces,--but Hedger was determined she should not
see him, and he darted behind the tent-fly. He was suddenly dripping with
cold sweat, his mouth was full of the bitter taste of anger and his
tongue felt stiff behind his teeth. Molly Welch, in a shirt-waist and a
white tam-o'-shanter cap, slipped out from the tent under his arm and
laughed up in his face. "She's a crazy one you brought along. She'll get
what she wants!"

"Oh, I'll settle with you, all right!" Hedger brought out with
difficulty.

"It's not my fault, Donnie. I couldn't do anything with her. She bought
me off. What's the matter with you ? Are you soft on her ? She's safe
enough. It's as easy as rolling off a log, if you keep cool." Molly Welch
was rather excited herself, and she was chewing gum at a high speed as
she stood beside him, looking up at the floating silver cone. "Now
watch," she exclaimed suddenly. "She's coming down on the bar. I advised
her to cut that out, but you see she does it first-rate. And she got rid
of the skirt, too. Those black tights show off her legs very well. She
keeps her feet together like I told her, and makes a good line along the
back. See the light on those silver slippers,--that was a good idea I
had. Come along to meet her. Don't be a grouch; she's done it fine!"

Molly tweaked his elbow, and then left him standing like a stump, while
she ran down the beach with the crowd.

Though Hedger was sulking, his eye could not help seeing the low blue
welter of the sea, the arrested bathers, standing in the surf, their arms
and legs stained red by the dropping sun, all shading their eyes and
gazing upward at the slowly falling silver star.

Molly Welch and the manager caught Eden under the arms and lifted her
aside, a red page dashed up with a bouquet, and the band struck up "Blue
Bell." Eden laughed and bowed, took Molly's arm, and ran up the sand in
her black tights and silver slippers, dodging the friendly old women, and
the gallant sports who wanted to offer their homage on the spot.

When she emerged from the tent, dressed in her own clothes, that part of
the beach was almost deserted. She stepped to her companion's side and
said carelessly: "Hadn't we better try to catch this boat ? I hope you're
not sore at me. Really, it was lots of fun."

Hedger looked at his watch. "Yes, we have fifteen minutes to get to the
boat," he said politely.

As they walked toward the pier, one of the pages ran up panting. "Lady,
you're carrying off the bouquet," he said, aggrievedly.

Eden stopped and looked at the bunch of spotty cotton roses in her hand.
"Of course. I want them for a souvenir. You gave them to me yourself."

"I give 'em to you for looks, but you can't take 'em away. They belong to
the show."

"Oh, you always use the same bunch ?"

"Sure we do. There ain't too much money in this business."

She laughed and tossed them back to him. "Why are you angry ?" she asked
Hedger. "I wouldn't have done it if I'd been with some fellows, but I
thought you were the sort who wouldn't mind. Molly didn't for a minute
think you would."

"What possessed you to do such a fool thing ?" he asked roughly.

"I don't know. When I saw her coming down, I wanted to try it. It looked
exciting. Didn't I hold myself as well as she did ?"

Hedger shrugged his shoulders, but in his heart he forgave her.

The return boat was not crowded, though the boats that passed them, going
out, were packed to the rails. The sun was setting. Boys and girls sat on
the long benches with their arms about each other, singing. Eden felt a
strong wish to propitiate her companion, to be alone with him. She had
been curiously wrought up by her balloon trip; it was a lark, but not
very satisfying unless one came back to something after the flight. She
wanted to be admired and adored. Though Eden said nothing, and sat with
her arms limp on the rail in front of her, looking languidly at the
rising silhouette of the city and the bright path of the sun, Hedger felt
a strange drawing near to her. If he but brushed her white skirt with his
knee, there was an instant communication between them, such as there had
never been before. They did not talk at all, but when they went over the
gang-plank she took his arm and kept her shoulder close to his. He felt
as if they were enveloped in a highly charged atmosphere, an invisible
network of subtle, almost painful sensibility. They had somehow taken
hold of each other.

An hour later, they were dining in the back garden of a little French
hotel on Ninth Street, long since passed away. It was cool and leafy
there, and the mosquitoes were not very numerous. A party of South
Americans at another table were drinking champagne, and Eden murmured
that she thought she would like some, if it were not too expensive.
"Perhaps it will make me think I am in the balloon again. That was a very
nice feeling. You've forgiven me, haven't you ?"

Hedger gave her a quick straight look from under his black eyebrows, and
something went over her that was like a chill, except that it was warm
and feathery. She drank most of the wine; her companion was indifferent
to it. He was talking more to her tonight than he had ever done before.
She asked him about a new picture she had seen in his room; a queer thing
full of stiff, supplicating female figures. "It's Indian, isn't it ?"

"Yes. I call it Rain Spirits, or maybe, Indian Rain. In the Southwest,
where I've been a good deal, the Indian traditions make women have to do
with the rain-fall. They were supposed to control it, somehow, and to be
able to find springs, and make moisture come out of the earth. You see
I'm trying to learn to paint what people think and feel; to get away from
all that photographic stuff. When I look at you, I don't see what a
camera would see, do I ?"

"How can I tell ?"

"Well, if I should paint you, I could make you understand what I see."
For the second time that day Hedger crimsoned unexpectedly, and his eyes
fell and steadily contemplated a dish of little radishes. "That
particular picture I got from a story a Mexican priest told me; he said
he found it in an old manuscript book in a monastery down there, written
by some Spanish Missionary, who got his stories from the Aztecs. This one
he called 'The Forty Lovers of the Queen,' and it was more or less about
rain-making."

"Aren't you going to tell it to me ?" Eden asked.

Hedger fumbled among the radishes. "I don't know if it's the proper kind
of story to tell a girl."

She smiled; "Oh, forget about that! I've been balloon riding today. I
like to hear you talk."

Her low voice was flattering. She had seemed like clay in his hands ever
since they got on the boat to come home. He leaned back in his chair,
forgot his food, and, looking at her intently, began to tell his story,
the theme of which he somehow felt was dangerous tonight.

The tale began, he said, somewhere in Ancient Mexico, and concerned the
daughter of a king. The birth of this Princess was preceded by unusual
portents. Three times her mother dreamed that she was delivered of
serpents, which betokened that the child she carried would have power
with the rain gods. The serpent was the symbol of water. The Princess
grew up dedicated to the gods, and wise men taught her the rain-making
mysteries. She was with difficulty restrained from men and was guarded at
all times, for it was the law of the Thunder that she be maiden until
her marriage. In the years of her adolescence, rain was abundant with her
people. The oldest man could not remember such fertility. When the
Princess had counted eighteen summers, her father went to drive out a war
party that harried his borders on the north and troubled his prosperity.
The King destroyed the invaders and brought home many prisoners. Among
the prisoners was a young chief, taller than any of his captors, of such
strength and ferocity that the King's people came a day's journey to look
at him. When the Princess beheld his great stature, and saw that his arms
and breast were covered with the figures of wild animals, bitten into the
skin and coloured, she begged his life from her father. She desired that
he should practise his art upon her, and prick upon her skin the signs of
Rain and Lightning and Thunder, and stain the wounds with herb-juices, as
they were upon his own body. For many days, upon the roof of the King's
house, the Princess submitted herself to the bone needle, and the women
with her marvelled at her fortitude. But the Princess was without shame
before the Captive, and it came about that he threw from him his needles
and his stains, and fell upon the Princess to violate her honour; and her
women ran down from the roof screaming, to call the guard which stood at
the gateway of the King's house, and none stayed to protect their
mistress.

When the guard came, the Captive was thrown into bonds, and he was
gelded, and his tongue was torn out, and he was given for a slave to the
Rain Princess.

The country of the Aztecs to the east was tormented by thirst, and their
king, hearing much of the rain-making arts of the Princess, sent an
embassy to her father, with presents and an offer of marriage. So the
Princess went from her father to be the Queen of the Aztecs, and she took
with her the Captive, who served her in everything with entire fidelity
and slept upon a mat before her door.

The King gave his bride a fortress on the outskirts of the city, whither
she retired to entreat the rain gods. This fortress was called the
Queen's House, and on the night of the new moon the Queen came to it from
the palace. But when the moon waxed and grew toward the round, because
the god of Thunder had had his will of her, then the Queen returned to
the King. Drought abated in the country and rain fell abundantly by
reason of the Queen's power with the stars.

When the Queen went to her own house she took with her no servant but the
Captive, and he slept outside her door and brought her food after she had
fasted. The Queen had a jewel of great value, a turquoise that had fallen
from the sun, and had the image of the sun upon it. And when she desired
a young man whom she had seen in the army or among the slaves, she sent
the Captive to him with the jewel, for a sign that he should come to her
secretly at the Queen's House upon business concerning the welfare of
all. And some, after she had talked with them, she sent away with
rewards; and some she took into her chamber and kept them by her for one
night or two. Afterward she called the Captive and bade him conduct the
youth by the secret way he had come, underneath the chambers of the
fortress. But for the going away of the Queen's lovers the Captive took
out the bar that was beneath a stone in the floor of the passage, and put
in its stead a rush-reed, and the youth stepped upon it and fell through
into a cavern that was the bed of an underground river, and whatever was
thrown into it was not seen again. In this service nor in any other did
the Captive fail the Queen.

But when the Queen sent for the Captain of the Archers, she detained him
four days in her chamber, calling often for food and wine, and was
greatly content with him. On the fourth day she went to the Captive
outside her door and said: "Tomorrow take this man up by the sure way, by
which the King comes, and let him live."

In the Queen's door were arrows, purple and white. When she desired the
King to come to her publicly, with his guard, she sent him a white arrow;
but when she sent the purple, he came secretly, and covered himself with
his mantle to be hidden from the stone gods at the gate. On the fifth
night that the Queen was with her lover, the Captive took a purple arrow
to the King, and the King came secretly and found them together. He
killed the Captain with his own hand, but the Queen he brought to public
trial. The Captive, when he was put to the question, told on his fingers
forty men that he had let through the underground passage into the river.
The Captive and the Queen were put to death by fire, both on the same
day, and afterward there was scarcity of rain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eden Bower sat shivering a little as she listened. Hedger was not trying
to please her, she thought, but to antagonize and frighten her by his
brutal story. She had often told herself that his lean, big-boned lower
jaw was like his bull-dog's, but tonight his face made Caesar's most
savage and determined expression seem an affectation. Now she was looking
at the man he really was. Nobody's eyes had ever defied her like this.
They were searching her and seeing everything; all she had concealed from
Livingston, and from the millionaire and his friends, and from the
newspaper men. He was testing her, trying her out, and she was more ill
at ease than she wished to show.

"That's quite a thrilling story," she said at last, rising and winding
her scarf about her throat. "It must be getting late. Almost every one
has gone."

They walked down the Avenue like people who have quarrelled, or who wish
to get rid of each other. Hedger did not take her arm at the street
crossings, and they did not linger in the Square. At her door he tried
none of the old devices of the Livingston boys. He stood like a post,
having forgotten to take off his hat, gave her a harsh, threatening
glance, muttered "goodnight," and shut his own door noisily.

There was no question of sleep for Eden Bower. Her brain was working like
a machine that would never stop. After she undressed, she tried to calm
her nerves by smoking a cigarette, lying on the divan by the open window.
But she grew wider and wider awake, combating the challenge that had
flamed all evening in Hedger's eyes. The balloon had been one kind of
excitement, the wine another; but the thing that had roused her, as a
blow rouses a proud man, was the doubt, the contempt, the sneering
hostility with which the painter had looked at her when he told his
savage story. Crowds and balloons were all very well, she reflected, but
woman's chief adventure is man. With a mind over active and a sense of
life over strong, she wanted to walk across the roofs in the starlight,
to sail over the sea and face at once a world of which she had never been
afraid.

Hedger must be asleep; his dog had stopped sniffing under the double
doors. Eden put on her wrapper and slippers and stole softly down the
hall over the old carpet; one loose board creaked just as she reached the
ladder. The trap-door was open, as always on hot nights. When she stepped
out on the roof she drew a long breath and walked across it, looking up
at the sky. Her foot touched something soft; she heard a low growl, and
on the instant Caesar's sharp little teeth caught her ankle and waited.
His breath was like steam on her leg. Nobody had ever intruded upon his
roof before, and he panted for the movement or the word that would let
him spring his jaw. Instead, Hedger's hand seized his throat.

"Wait a minute. I'll settle with him," he said grimly. He dragged the dog
toward the manhole and disappeared. When he came back, he found Eden
standing over by the dark chimney, looking away in an offended attitude.

"I caned him unmercifully," he panted. "Of course you didn't hear
anything; he never whines when I beat him. He didn't nip you, did he ?"

"I don't know whether he broke the skin or not," she answered
aggrievedly, still looking off into the west.

"If I were one of your friends in white pants, I'd strike a match to find
whether you were hurt, though I know you are not, and then I'd see your
ankle, wouldn't I ?"

"I suppose so."

He shook his head and stood with his hands in the pockets of his old
painting jacket. "I'm not up to such boy-tricks. If you want the place
to yourself, I'll clear out. There are plenty of places where I can spend
the night, what's left of it. But if you stay here and I stay here--" He
shrugged his shoulders.

Eden did not stir, and she made no reply. Her head drooped slightly, as
if she were considering. But the moment he put his arms about her they
began to talk, both at once, as people do in an opera. The instant avowal
brought out a flood of trivial admissions. Hedger confessed his crime,
was reproached and forgiven, and now Eden knew what it was in his look
that she had found so disturbing of late.

Standing against the black chimney, with the sky behind and blue shadows
before, they looked like one of Hedger's own paintings of that period;
two figures, one white and one dark, and nothing whatever distinguishable
about them but that they were male and female. The faces were lost, the
contours blurred in shadow, but the figures were a man and a woman, and
that was their whole concern and their mysterious beauty,--it was the
rhythm in which they moved, at last, along the roof and down into the
dark hole; he first, drawing her gently after him. She came down very
slowly. The excitement and bravado and uncertainty of that long day and
night seemed all at once to tell upon her. When his feet were on the
carpet and he reached up to lift her down, she twined her arms about his
neck as after a long separation, and turned her face to him, and her
lips, with their perfume of youth and passion.

       *       *       *       *       *

One Saturday afternoon Hedger was sitting in the window of Eden's music
room. They had been watching the pigeons come wheeling over the roofs
from their unknown feeding grounds.

"Why," said Eden suddenly, "don't we fix those big doors into your studio
so they will open ? Then, if I want you, I won't have to go through the
hall. That illustrator is loafing about a good deal of late."

"I'll open them, if you wish. The bolt is on your side."

"Isn't there one on yours, too ?"

"No. I believe a man lived there for years before I came in, and the
nurse used to have these rooms herself. Naturally, the lock was on
the lady's side."

Eden laughed and began to examine the bolt. "It's all stuck up with
paint." Looking about, her eye lighted upon a bronze Buddah which was
one of the nurse's treasures. Taking him by his head, she struck the bolt
a blow with his squatting posteriors. The two doors creaked, sagged, and
swung weakly inward a little way, as if they were too old for such
escapades. Eden tossed the heavy idol into a stuffed chair. "That's
better," she exclaimed exultantly. "So the bolts are always on the lady's
side ? What a lot society takes for granted!"

Hedger laughed, sprang up and caught her arms roughly. "Whoever takes you
for granted--Did anybody, ever ?"

"Everybody does. That's why I'm here. You are the only one who knows
anything about me. Now I'll have to dress if we're going out for dinner."

He lingered, keeping his hold on her. "But I won't always be the only
one, Eden Bower. I won't be the last."

"No, I suppose not," she said carelessly. "But what does that matter ? You
are the first."

As a long, despairing whine broke in the warm stillness, they drew apart.
Caesar, lying on his bed in the dark corner, had lifted his head at this
invasion of sunlight, and realized that the side of his room was broken
open, and his whole world shattered by change. There stood his master and
this woman, laughing at him! The woman was pulling the long black hair of
this mightiest of men, who bowed his head and permitted it.


VI

In time they quarrelled, of course, and about an abstraction,--as young
people often do, as mature people almost never do. Eden came in late one
afternoon. She had been with some of her musical friends to lunch at
Burton Ives' studio, and she began telling Hedger about its splendours.
He listened a moment and then threw down his brushes. "I know exactly
what it's like," he said impatiently. "A very good department-store
conception of a studio. It's one of the show places."

"Well, it's gorgeous, and he said I could bring you to see him. The boys
tell me he's awfully kind about giving people a lift, and you might get
something out of it."

Hedger started up and pushed his canvas out of the way. "What could I
possibly get from Burton Ives ? He's almost the worst painter in the
world; the stupidest, I mean."

Eden was annoyed. Burton Ives had been very nice to her and had begged
her to sit for him. "You must admit that he's a very successful one,"
she said coldly.

"Of course he is! Anybody can be successful who will do that sort of
thing. I wouldn't paint his pictures for all the money in New York."

"Well, I saw a lot of them, and I think they are beautiful."

Hedger bowed stiffly.

"What's the use of being a great painter if nobody knows about you ?" Eden
went on persuasively. "Why don't you paint the kind of pictures people
can understand, and then, after you're successful, do whatever you like ?"

"As I look at it," said Hedger brusquely, "I am successful."

Eden glanced about. "Well, I don't see any evidences of it," she said,
biting her lip. "He has a Japanese servant and a wine cellar, and keeps a
riding horse."

Hedger melted a little. "My dear, I have the most expensive luxury in the
world, and I am much more extravagant than Burton Ives, for I work to
please nobody but myself."

"You mean you could make money and don't ? That you don't try to get a
public ?"

"Exactly. A public only wants what has been done over and over. I'm
painting for painters,--who haven't been born."

"What would you do if I brought Mr. Ives down here to see your things ?"

"Well, for God's sake, don't! Before he left I'd probably tell him what I
thought of him."

Eden rose. "I give you up. You know very well there's only one kind of
success that's real."

"Yes, but it's not the kind you mean. So you've been thinking me a scrub
painter, who needs a helping hand from some fashionable studio man ? What
the devil have you had anything to do with me for, then ?"

"There's no use talking to you," said Eden walking slowly toward the
door. "I've been trying to pull wires for you all afternoon, and this is
what it comes to." She had expected that the tidings of a prospective
call from the great man would be received very differently, and had been
thinking as she came home in the stage how, as with a magic wand, she
might gild Hedger's future, float him out of his dark hole on a tide of
prosperity, see his name in the papers and his pictures in the windows on
Fifth Avenue.

Hedger mechanically snapped the midsummer leash on Caesar's collar and
they ran downstairs and hurried through Sullivan Street off toward the
river. He wanted to be among rough, honest people, to get down where the
big drays bumped over stone paving blocks and the men wore corduroy
trowsers and kept their shirts open at the neck. He stopped for a drink
in one of the sagging bar-rooms on the water front. He had never in his
life been so deeply wounded; he did not know he could be so hurt. He had
told this girl all his secrets. On the roof, in these warm, heavy summer
nights, with her hands locked in his, he had been able to explain all his
misty ideas about an unborn art the world was waiting for; had been able
to explain them better than he had ever done to himself. And she had
looked away to the chattels of this uptown studio and coveted them for
him! To her he was only an unsuccessful Burton Ives.

Then why, as he had put it to her, did she take up with him ? Young,
beautiful, talented as she was, why had she wasted herself on a scrub ?
Pity ? Hardly; she wasn't sentimental. There was no explaining her. But in
this passion that had seemed so fearless and so fated to be, his own
position now looked to him ridiculous; a poor dauber without money or
fame,--it was her caprice to load him with favours. Hedger ground his
teeth so loud that his dog, trotting beside him, heard him and looked up.

While they were having supper at the oyster-man's, he planned his escape.
Whenever he saw her again, everything he had told her, that he should
never have told any one, would come back to him; ideas he had never
whispered even to the painter whom he worshipped and had gone all the way
to France to see. To her they must seem his apology for not having horses
and a valet, or merely the puerile boastfulness of a weak man. Yet if she
slipped the bolt tonight and came through the doors and said, "Oh, weak
man, I belong to you!" what could he do ? That was the danger. He would
catch the train out to Long Beach tonight, and tomorrow he would go on to
the north end of Long Island, where an old friend of his had a summer
studio among the sand dunes. He would stay until things came right in his
mind. And she could find a smart painter, or take her punishment.

When he went home, Eden's room was dark; she was dining out somewhere. He
threw his things into a hold-all he had carried about the world with him,
strapped up some colours and canvases, and ran downstairs.


VII

Five days later Hedger was a restless passenger on a dirty, crowded
Sunday train, coming back to town. Of course he saw now how unreasonable
he had been in expecting a Huntington girl to know anything about
pictures; here was a whole continent full of people who knew nothing
about pictures and he didn't hold it against them. What had such things
to do with him and Eden Bower ? When he lay out on the dunes, watching the
moon come up out of the sea, it had seemed to him that there was no
wonder in the world like the wonder of Eden Bower. He was going back to
her because she was older than art, because she was the most overwhelming
thing that had ever come into his life.

He had written her yesterday, begging her to be at home this evening,
telling her that he was contrite, and wretched enough.

Now that he was on his way to her, his stronger feeling unaccountably
changed to a mood that was playful and tender. He wanted to share
everything with her, even the most trivial things. He wanted to tell her
about the people on the train, coming back tired from their holiday with
bunches of wilted flowers and dirty daisies; to tell her that the
fish-man, to whom she had often sent him for lobsters, was among the
passengers, disguised in a silk shirt and a spotted tie, and how his wife
looked exactly like a fish, even to her eyes, on which cataracts were
forming. He could tell her, too, that he hadn't as much as unstrapped his
canvases,--that ought to convince her.

In those days passengers from Long Island came into New York by ferry.
Hedger had to be quick about getting his dog out of the express car in
order to catch the first boat. The East River, and the bridges, and the
city to the west, were burning in the conflagration of the sunset; there
was that great home-coming reach of evening in the air.

The car changes from Thirty-fourth Street were too many and too
perplexing; for the first time in his life Hedger took a hansom cab for
Washington Square. Caesar sat bolt upright on the worn leather cushion
beside him, and they jogged off, looking down on the rest of the world.

It was twilight when they drove down lower Fifth Avenue into the Square,
and through the Arch behind them were the two long rows of pale violet
lights that used to bloom so beautifully against the grey stone and
asphalt. Here and yonder about the Square hung globes that shed a
radiance not unlike the blue mists of evening, emerging softly when
daylight died, as the stars emerged in the thin blue sky. Under them the
sharp shadows of the trees fell on the cracked pavement and the sleeping
grass. The first stars and the first lights were growing silver against
the gradual darkening, when Hedger paid his driver and went into the
house,--which, thank God, was still there! On the hall table lay his
letter of yesterday, unopened.

He went upstairs with every sort of fear and every sort of hope clutching
at his heart; it was as if tigers were tearing him. Why was there no gas
burning in the top hall ? He found matches and the gas bracket. He
knocked, but got no answer; nobody was there. Before his own door were
exactly five bottles of milk, standing in a row. The milk-boy had taken
spiteful pleasure in thus reminding him that he forgot to stop his order.

Hedger went down to the basement; it, too, was dark. The janitress was
taking her evening airing on the basement steps. She sat waving a
palm-leaf fan majestically, her dirty calico dress open at the neck. She
told him at once that there had been "changes." Miss Bower's room was to
let again, and the piano would go tomorrow. Yes, she left yesterday, she
sailed for Europe with friends from Chicago. They arrived on Friday,
heralded by many telegrams. Very rich people they were said to be,
though the man had refused to pay the nurse a month's rent in lieu of
notice,--which would have been only right, as the young lady had agreed
to take the rooms until October. Mrs. Foley had observed, too, that he
didn't overpay her or Willy for their trouble, and a great deal of
trouble they had been put to, certainly. Yes, the young lady was very
pleasant, but the nurse said there were rings on the mahogany table where
she had put tumblers and wine glasses. It was just as well she was gone.
The Chicago man was uppish in his ways, but not much to look at. She
supposed he had poor health, for there was nothing to him inside his
clothes.

Hedger went slowly up the stairs--never had they seemed so long, or his
legs so heavy. The upper floor was emptiness and silence. He unlocked
his room, lit the gas, and opened the windows. When he went to put his
coat in the closet, he found, hanging among his clothes, a pale,
flesh-tinted dressing gown he had liked to see her wear, with a
perfume--oh, a perfume that was still Eden Bower! He shut the door behind
him and there, in the dark, for a moment he lost his manliness. It was
when he held this garment to him that he found a letter in the pocket.

The note was written with a lead pencil, in haste: She was sorry that he
was angry, but she still didn't know just what she had done. She had
thought Mr. Ives would be useful to him; she guessed he was too proud.
She wanted awfully to see him again, but Fate came knocking at her door
after he had left her. She believed in Fate. She would never forget him,
and she knew he would become the greatest painter in the world. Now she
must pack. She hoped he wouldn't mind her leaving the dressing gown;
somehow, she could never wear it again.

After Hedger read this, standing under the gas, he went back into the
closet and knelt down before the wall; the knot hole had been plugged up
with a ball of wet paper,--the same blue note-paper on which her letter
was written.

He was hard hit. Tonight he had to bear the loneliness of a whole
lifetime. Knowing himself so well, he could hardly believe that such a
thing had ever happened to him, that such a woman had lain happy and
contented in his arms. And now it was over. He turned out the light and
sat down on his painter's stool before the big window. Caesar, on the
floor beside him, rested his head on his master's knee. We must leave
Hedger thus, sitting in his tank with his dog, looking up at the stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMING, APHRODITE! This legend, in electric lights over the Lexington
Opera House, had long announced the return of Eden Bower to New York
after years of spectacular success in Paris. She came at last, under the
management of an American Opera Company, but bringing her own _chef
d'orchestre_.

One bright December afternoon Eden Bower was going down Fifth Avenue in
her car, on the way to her broker, in Williams Street. Her thoughts were
entirely upon stocks,--Cerro de Pasco, and how much she should buy of
it,--when she suddenly looked up and realized that she was skirting
Washington Square. She had not seen the place since she rolled out of it
in an old-fashioned four-wheeler to seek her fortune, eighteen years ago.

"_Arrêtez, Alphonse. Attendez moi_," she called, and opened the door
before he could reach it. The children who were streaking over the
asphalt on roller skates saw a lady in a long fur coat, and short,
high-heeled shoes, alight from a French car and pace slowly about the
Square, holding her muff to her chin. This spot, at least, had changed
very little, she reflected; the same trees, the same fountain, the white
arch, and over yonder, Garibaldi, drawing the sword for freedom. There,
just opposite her, was the old red brick house.

"Yes, that is the place," she was thinking. "I can smell the carpets now,
and the dog,--what was his name ? That grubby bathroom at the end of the
hall, and that dreadful Hedger--still, there was something about him, you
know--" She glanced up and blinked against the sun. From somewhere in the
crowded quarter south of the Square a flock of pigeons rose, wheeling
quickly upward into the brilliant blue sky. She threw back her head,
pressed her muff closer to her chin, and watched them with a smile of
amazement and delight. So they still rose, out of all that dirt and noise
and squalor, fleet and silvery, just as they used to rise that summer
when she was twenty and went up in a balloon on Coney Island!

Alphonse opened the door and tucked her robes about her. All the way down
town her mind wandered from Cerro de Pasco, and she kept smiling and
looking up at the sky.

When she had finished her business with the broker, she asked him to look
in the telephone book for the address of M. Gaston Jules, the picture
dealer, and slipped the paper on which he wrote it into her glove. It was
five o'clock when she reached the French Galleries, as they were called.
On entering she gave the attendant her card, asking him to take it to M.
Jules. The dealer appeared very promptly and begged her to come into his
private office, where he pushed a great chair toward his desk for her and
signalled his secretary to leave the room.

"How good your lighting is in here," she observed, glancing about. "I met
you at Simon's studio, didn't I ? Oh, no! I never forget anybody who
interests me." She threw her muff on his writing table and sank into the
deep chair. "I have come to you for some information that's not in my
line. Do you know anything about an American painter named Hedger ?"

He took the seat opposite her. "Don Hedger ? But, certainly! There are
some very interesting things of his in an exhibition at V----'s. If you
would care to--"

She held up her hand. "No, no. I've no time to go to exhibitions. Is he a
man of any importance ?"

"Certainly. He is one of the first men among the moderns. That is to say,
among the very moderns. He is always coming up with something different.
He often exhibits in Paris, you must have seen--"

"No, I tell you I don't go to exhibitions. Has he had great success ? That
is what I want to know."

M. Jules pulled at his short grey moustache. "But, Madame, there are many
kinds of success," he began cautiously.

Madame gave a dry laugh. "Yes, so he used to say. We once quarrelled on
that issue. And how would you define his particular kind ?"

M. Jules grew thoughtful. "He is a great name with all the young men, and
he is decidedly an influence in art. But one can't definitely place a man
who is original, erratic, and who is changing all the time."

She cut him short. "Is he much talked about at home ? In Paris, I mean ?
Thanks. That's all I want to know." She rose and began buttoning her
coat. "One doesn't like to have been an utter fool, even at twenty."

"_Mais, non_!" M. Jules handed her her muff with a quick, sympathetic
glance. He followed her out through the carpeted show-room, now closed to
the public and draped in cheesecloth, and put her into her car with words
appreciative of the honour she had done him in calling.

Leaning back in the cushions, Eden Bower closed her eyes, and her face,
as the street lamps flashed their ugly orange light upon it, became
hard and settled, like a plaster cast; so a sail, that has been filled by
a strong breeze, behaves when the wind suddenly dies. Tomorrow night the
wind would blow again, and this mask would be the golden face of
Aphrodite. But a "big" career takes its toll, even with the best of luck.




The Diamond Mine




I

I first became aware that Cressida Garnet was on board when I saw young
men with cameras going up to the boat deck. In that exposed spot she was
good-naturedly posing for them--amid fluttering lavender scarfs--wearing
a most unseaworthy hat, her broad, vigorous face wreathed in smiles. She
was too much an American not to believe in publicity. All advertising
was good. If it was good for breakfast foods, it was good for prime
donna,--especially for a prima donna who would never be any younger and
who had just announced her intention of marrying a fourth time.

Only a few days before, when I was lunching with some friends at
Sherry's, I had seen Jerome Brown come in with several younger men,
looking so pleased and prosperous that I exclaimed upon it.

"His affairs," some one explained, "are looking up. He's going to marry
Cressida Garnet. Nobody believed it at first, but since she confirms it
he's getting all sorts of credit. That woman's a diamond mine."

If there was ever a man who needed a diamond mine at hand, immediately
convenient, it was Jerome Brown. But as an old friend of Cressida Garnet,
I was sorry to hear that mining operations were to be begun again.

I had been away from New York and had not seen Cressida for a year; now I
paused on the gangplank to note how very like herself she still was, and
with what undiminished zeal she went about even the most trifling things
that pertained to her profession. From that distance I could recognize
her "carrying" smile, and even what, in Columbus, we used to call "the
Garnet look."

At the foot of the stairway leading up to the boat deck stood two of the
factors in Cressida's destiny. One of them was her sister, Miss Julia; a
woman of fifty with a relaxed, mournful face, an ageing skin that browned
slowly, like meerchaum, and the unmistakable "look" by which one knew a
Garnet. Beside her, pointedly ignoring her, smoking a cigarette while he
ran over the passenger list with supercilious almond eyes, stood a youth
in a pink shirt and a green plush hat, holding a French bull-dog on the
leash. This was "Horace," Cressida's only son. He, at any rate, had not
the Garnet look. He was rich and ruddy, indolent and insolent, with soft
oval cheeks and the blooming complexion of twenty-two. There was the
beginning of a silky shadow on his upper lip. He seemed like a ripe fruit
grown out of a rich soil; "oriental," his mother called his peculiar
lusciousness. His aunt's restless and aggrieved glance kept flecking him
from the side, but the two were as motionless as the _bouledogue_,
standing there on his bench legs and surveying his travelling basket with
loathing. They were waiting, in constrained immobility, for Cressida to
descend and reanimate them,--will them to do or to be something. Forward,
by the rail, I saw the stooped, eager back for which I was unconsciously
looking: Miletus Poppas, the Greek Jew, Cressida's accompanist and
shadow. We were all there, I thought with a smile, except Jerome Brown.

The first member of Cressida's party with whom I had speech was Mr.
Poppas. When we were two hours out I came upon him in the act of dropping
overboard a steamer cushion made of American flags. Cressida never
sailed, I think, that one of these vivid comforts of travel did not reach
her at the dock. Poppas recognized me just as the striped object left his
hand. He was standing with his arm still extended over the rail, his
fingers contemptuously sprung back. "Lest we forget!" he said with a
shrug. "Does Madame Cressida know we are to have the pleasure of your
company for this voyage ?" He spoke deliberate, grammatical English--he
despised the American rendering of the language--but there was an
indescribably foreign quality in his voice,--a something muted; and
though he aspirated his "th's" with such conscientious thoroughness,
there was always the thud of a "d" in them. Poppas stood before me in a
short, tightly buttoned grey coat and cap, exactly the colour of his
greyish skin and hair and waxed moustache; a monocle on a very wide black
ribbon dangled over his chest. As to his age, I could not offer a
conjecture. In the twelve years I had known his thin lupine face behind
Cressida's shoulder, it had not changed. I was used to his cold,
supercilious manner, to his alarming, deep-set eyes,--very close
together, in colour a yellowish green, and always gleaming with something
like defeated fury, as if he were actually on the point of having it out
with you, or with the world, at last.

I asked him if Cressida had engagements in London.

"Quite so; the Manchester Festival, some concerts at Queen's Hall, and
the Opera at Covent Garden; a rather special production of the operas
of Mozart. That she can still do quite well,--which is not at all, of
course, what we might have expected, and only goes to show that our
Madame Cressida is now, as always, a charming exception to rules."
Poppas' tone about his client was consistently patronizing, and he was
always trying to draw one into a conspiracy of two, based on a mutual
understanding of her shortcomings.

I approached him on the one subject I could think of which was more
personal than his usefulness to Cressida, and asked him whether he still
suffered from facial neuralgia as much as he had done in former years,
and whether he was therefore dreading London, where the climate used to
be so bad for him.

"And is still," he caught me up, "And is still! For me to go to London is
martyrdom, _chère Madame_. In New York it is bad enough, but in London it
is the _auto da fé_, nothing less. My nervous system is exotic in any
country washed by the Atlantic ocean, and it shivers like a little
hairless dog from Mexico. It never relaxes. I think I have told you about
my favourite city in the middle of Asia, _la sainte Asie_, where the
rainfall is absolutely nil, and you are protected on every side by
hundreds of metres of warm, dry sand. I was there when I was a child
once, and it is still my intention to retire there when I have finished
with all this. I would be there now, n-ow-ow," his voice rose
querulously, "if Madame Cressida did not imagine that she needs me,--and
her fancies, you know," he flourished his hands, "one gives in to them.
In humouring her caprices you and I have already played some together."

We were approaching Cressida's deck chairs, ranged under the open windows
of her stateroom. She was already recumbent, swathed in lavender scarfs
and wearing purple orchids--doubtless from Jerome Brown. At her left,
Horace had settled down to a French novel, and Julia Garnet, at her
right, was complainingly regarding the grey horizon. On seeing me,
Cressida struggled under her fur-lined robes and got to her feet,--which
was more than Horace or Miss Julia managed to do. Miss Julia, as I could
have foretold, was not pleased. All the Garnets had an awkward manner
with me. Whether it was that I reminded them of things they wished to
forget, or whether they thought I esteemed Cressida too highly and the
rest of them too lightly, I do not know; but my appearance upon their
scene always put them greatly on their dignity. After Horace had offered
me his chair and Miss Julia had said doubtfully that she thought I was
looking rather better than when she last saw me, Cressida took my arm and
walked me off toward the stern.

"Do you know, Carrie, I half wondered whether I shouldn't find you here,
or in London, because you always turn up at critical moments in my life."
She pressed my arm confidentially, and I felt that she was once more
wrought up to a new purpose. I told her that I had heard some rumour of
her engagement.

"It's quite true, and it's all that it should be," she reassured me.
"I'll tell you about it later, and you'll see that it's a real solution.
They are against me, of course,--all except Horace. He has been such a
comfort."

Horace's support, such as it was, could always be had in exchange for his
mother's signature, I suspected. The pale May day had turned bleak and
chilly, and we sat down by an open hatchway which emitted warm air from
somewhere below. At this close range I studied Cressida's face, and felt
reassured of her unabated vitality; the old force of will was still
there, and with it her characteristic optimism, the old hope of a
"solution."

"You have been in Columbus lately ?" she was saying. "No, you needn't tell
me about it," with a sigh. "Why is it, Caroline, that there is so little
of my life I would be willing to live over again ? So little that I can
even think of without depression. Yet I've really not such a bad
conscience. It may mean that I still belong to the future more than to
the past, do you think ?"

My assent was not warm enough to fix her attention, and she went on
thoughtfully: "Of course, it was a bleak country and a bleak period. But
I've sometimes wondered whether the bleakness may not have been in me,
too; for it has certainly followed me. There, that is no way to talk!"
she drew herself up from a momentary attitude of dejection. "Sea air
always lets me down at first. That's why it's so good for me in the end."

"I think Julia always lets you down, too," I said bluntly. "But perhaps
that depression works out in the same way."

Cressida laughed. "Julia is rather more depressing than Georgie, isn't
she ? But it was Julia's turn. I can't come alone, and they've grown to
expect it. They haven't, either of them, much else to expect."

At this point the deck steward approached us with a blue envelope. "A
wireless for you, Madame Garnet."

Cressida put out her hand with impatience, thanked him graciously, and
with every indication of pleasure tore open the blue envelope. "It's
from Jerome Brown," she said with some confusion, as she folded the paper
small and tucked it between the buttons of her close-fitting gown,
"Something he forgot to tell me. How long shall you be in London ? Good; I
want you to meet him. We shall probably be married there as soon as my
engagements are over." She rose. "Now I must write some letters. Keep two
places at your table, so that I can slip away from my party and dine with
you sometimes."

I walked with her toward her chair, in which Mr. Poppas was now
reclining. He indicated his readiness to rise, but she shook her head and
entered the door of her deck suite. As she passed him, his eye went over
her with assurance until it rested upon the folded bit of blue paper in
her corsage. He must have seen the original rectangle in the steward's
hand; having found it again, he dropped back between Horace and Miss
Julia, whom I think he disliked no more than he did the rest of the
world. He liked Julia quite as well as he liked me, and he liked me quite
as well as he liked any of the women to whom he would be fitfully
agreeable upon the voyage. Once or twice, during each crossing, he did
his best and made himself very charming indeed, to keep his hand in,--for
the same reason that he kept a dummy keyboard in his stateroom, somewhere
down in the bowels of the boat. He practised all the small economies;
paid the minimum rate, and never took a deck chair, because, as Horace
was usually in the cardroom, he could sit in Horace's.

The three of them lay staring at the swell which was steadily growing
heavier. Both men had covered themselves with rugs, after dutifully
bundling up Miss Julia. As I walked back and forth on the deck, I was
struck by their various degrees of in-expressiveness. Opaque brown eyes,
almond-shaped and only half open; wolfish green eyes, close-set and
always doing something, with a crooked gleam boring in this direction or
in that; watery grey eyes, like the thick edges of broken skylight glass:
I would have given a great deal to know what was going on behind each
pair of them.

These three were sitting there in a row because they were all woven into
the pattern of one large and rather splendid life. Each had a bond, and
each had a grievance. If they could have their will, what would they do
with the generous, credulous creature who nourished them, I wondered ? How
deep a humiliation would each egotism exact ? They would scarcely have
harmed her in fortune or in person (though I think Miss Julia looked
forward to the day when Cressida would "break" and could be mourned
over),--but the fire at which she warmed herself, the little secret
hope,--the illusion, ridiculous or sublime, which kept her going,--that
they would have stamped out on the instant, with the whole Garnet pack
behind them to make extinction sure. All, except, perhaps, Miletus
Poppas. He was a vulture of the vulture race, and he had the beak of one.
But I always felt that if ever he had her thus at his mercy,--if ever he
came upon the softness that was hidden under so much hardness, the warm
credulity under a life so dated and scheduled and "reported" and
generally exposed,--he would hold his hand and spare.

The weather grew steadily rougher. Miss Julia at last plucked Poppas by
the sleeve and indicated that she wished to be released from her
wrappings. When she disappeared, there seemed to be every reason to hope
that she might be off the scene for awhile. As Cressida said, if she had
not brought Julia, she would have had to bring Georgie, or some other
Garnet. Cressida's family was like that of the unpopular Prince of
Wales, of whom, when he died, some wag wrote:

_If it had been his brother,
Better him than another.
If it had been his sister,
No one would have missed her._

Miss Julia was dampening enough, but Miss Georgie was aggressive and
intrusive. She was out to prove to the world, and more especially to
Ohio, that all the Garnets were as like Cressida as two peas. Both
sisters were club-women, social service workers, and directors in musical
societies, and they were continually travelling up and down the Middle
West to preside at meetings or to deliver addresses. They reminded one of
two sombre, bumping electrics, rolling about with no visible means of
locomotion, always running out of power and lying beached in some
inconvenient spot until they received a check or a suggestion from
Cressy. I was only too well acquainted with the strained, anxious
expression that the sight of their handwriting brought to Cressida's face
when she ran over her morning mail at breakfast. She usually put their
letters by to read "when she was feeling up to it" and hastened to open
others which might possibly contain something gracious or pleasant.
Sometimes these family unburdenings lay about unread for several days.
Any other letters would have got themselves lost, but these bulky
epistles, never properly fitted to their envelopes, seemed immune to
mischance and unfailingly disgorged to Cressida long explanations as to
why her sisters had to do and to have certain things precisely upon her
account and because she was so much a public personage.

The truth was that all the Garnets, and particularly her two sisters,
were consumed by an habitual, bilious, unenterprising envy of Cressy.
They never forgot that, no matter what she did for them or how far she
dragged them about the world with her, she would never take one of them
to live with her in her Tenth Street house in New York. They thought that
was the thing they most wanted. But what they wanted, in the last
analysis, was to _be_ Cressida. For twenty years she had been plunged in
struggle; fighting for her life at first, then for a beginning, for
growth, and at last for eminence and perfection; fighting in the dark,
and afterward in the light,--which, with her bad preparation, and with
her uninspired youth already behind her, took even more courage. During
those twenty years the Garnets had been comfortable and indolent and
vastly self-satisfied; and now they expected Cressida to make them equal
sharers in the finer rewards of her struggle. When her brother Buchanan
told me he thought Cressida ought "to make herself one of them," he
stated the converse of what he meant. They coveted the qualities which
had made her success, as well as the benefits which came from it. More
than her furs or her fame or her fortune, they wanted her personal
effectiveness, her brighter glow and stronger will to live.

"Sometimes," I have heard Cressida say, looking up from a bunch of those
sloppily written letters, "sometimes I get discouraged."

For several days the rough weather kept Miss Julia cloistered in
Cressida's deck suite with the maid, Luisa, who confided to me that the
Signorina Garnet was "_dificile_." After dinner I usually found Cressida
unincumbered, as Horace was always in the cardroom and Mr. Poppas either
nursed his neuralgia or went through the exercise of making himself
interesting to some one of the young women on board. One evening, the
third night out, when the sea was comparatively quiet and the sky was
full of broken black clouds, silvered by the moon at their ragged edges,
Cressida talked to me about Jerome Brown.

I had known each of her former husbands. The first one, Charley Wilton,
Horace's father, was my cousin. He was organist in a church in Columbus,
and Cressida married him when she was nineteen. He died of tuberculosis
two years after Horace was born. Cressida nursed him through a long
illness and made the living besides. Her courage during the three years
of her first marriage was fine enough to foreshadow her future to any
discerning eye, and it had made me feel that she deserved any number of
chances at marital happiness. There had, of course, been a particular
reason for each subsequent experiment, and a sufficiently alluring
promise of success. Her motives, in the case of Jerome Brown, seemed to
me more vague and less convincing than those which she had explained to
me on former occasions.

"It's nothing hasty," she assured me. "It's been coming on for several
years. He has never pushed me, but he was always there--some one to count
on. Even when I used to meet him at the Whitings, while I was still
singing at the Metropolitan, I always felt that he was different from the
others; that if I were in straits of any kind, I could call on him. You
can't know what that feeling means to me, Carrie. If you look back,
you'll see it's something I've never had."

I admitted that, in so far as I knew, she had never been much addicted to
leaning on people.

"I've never had any one to lean on," she said with a short laugh. Then
she went on, quite seriously: "Somehow, my relations with people always
become business relations in the end. I suppose it's because,--except for
a sort of professional personality, which I've had to get, just as I've
had to get so many other things,--I've not very much that's personal to
give people. I've had to give too much else. I've had to try too hard for
people who wouldn't try at all."

"Which," I put in firmly, "has done them no good, and has robbed the
people who really cared about you."

"By making me grubby, you mean ?"

"By making you anxious and distracted so much of the time; empty."

She nodded mournfully. "Yes, I know. You used to warn me. Well,
there's not one of my brothers and sisters who does not feel that I
carried off the family success, just as I might have carried off the
family silver,--if there'd been any! They take the view that there were
just so many prizes in the bag; I reached in and took them, so there were
none left for the others. At my age, that's a dismal truth to waken up
to."

Cressida reached for my hand and held it a moment, as if she needed
courage to face the facts in her case. "When one remembers one's first
success; how one hoped to go home like a Christmas tree full of
presents--How much one learns in a life-time! That year when Horace was a
baby and Charley was dying, and I was touring the West with the Williams
band, it was my feeling about my own people that made me go at all. Why I
didn't drop myself into one of those muddy rivers, or turn on the gas in
one of those dirty hotel rooms, I don't know to this day. At twenty-two
you must hope for something more than to be able to bury your husband
decently, and what I hoped for was to make my family happy. It was the
same afterward in Germany. A young woman must live for human people.
Horace wasn't enough. I might have had lovers, of course. I suppose you
will say it would have been better if I had."

Though there seemed no need for me to say anything, I murmured that I
thought there were more likely to be limits to the rapacity of a lover
than to that of a discontented and envious family.

"Well," Cressida gathered herself up, "once I got out from under it all,
didn't I ? And perhaps, in a milder way, such a release can come again.
You were the first person I told when I ran away with Charley, and for a
long while you were the only one who knew about Blasius Bouchalka. That
time, at least, I shook the Garnets. I wasn't distracted or empty. That
time I was all there!"

"Yes," I echoed her, "that time you were all there. It's the greatest
possible satisfaction to remember it."

"But even that," she sighed, "was nothing but lawyers and accounts in the
end--and a hurt. A hurt that has lasted. I wonder what is the matter with
me ?"

The matter with Cressida was, that more than any woman I have ever known,
she appealed to the acquisitive instinct in men; but this was not easily
said, even in the brutal frankness of a long friendship.

We would probably have gone further into the Bouchalka chapter of her
life, had not Horace appeared and nervously asked us if we did not wish
to take a turn before we went inside. I pleaded indolence, but Cressida
rose and disappeared with him. Later I came upon them, standing at the
stern above the huddled steerage deck, which was by this time bathed in
moonlight, under an almost clear sky. Down there on the silvery floor,
little hillocks were scattered about under quilts and shawls; family
units, presumably,--male, female, and young. Here and there a black shawl
sat alone, nodding. They crouched submissively under the moonlight as if
it were a spell. In one of those hillocks a baby was crying, but the
sound was faint and thin, a slender protest which aroused no response.
Everything was so still that I could hear snatches of the low talk
between my friends. Cressida's voice was deep and entreating. She was
remonstrating with Horace about his losses at bridge, begging him to keep
away from the cardroom.

"But what else is there to do on a trip like this, my Lady ?" he
expostulated, tossing his spark of a cigarette-end overboard. "What is
there, now, to do ?"

"Oh, Horace!" she murmured, "how can you be so ? If I were twenty-two, and
a boy, with some one to back me--"

Horace drew his shoulders together and buttoned his top-coat. "Oh, I've
not your energy, Mother dear. We make no secret of that. I am as I am. I
didn't ask to be born into this charming world."

To this gallant speech Cressida made no answer. She stood with her hand
on the rail and her head bent forward, as if she had lost herself in
thought. The ends of her scarf, lifted by the breeze, fluttered upward,
almost transparent in the argent light. Presently she turned away,--as
if she had been alone and were leaving only the night sea behind
her,--and walked slowly forward; a strong, solitary figure on the white
deck, the smoke-like scarf twisting and climbing and falling back upon
itself in the light over her head. She reached the door of her stateroom
and disappeared. Yes, she was a Garnet, but she was also Cressida; and
she had done what she had done.


II

My first recollections of Cressida Garnet have to do with the Columbus
Public Schools; a little girl with sunny brown hair and eager bright
eyes, looking anxiously at the teacher and reciting the names and
dates of the Presidents: "James Buchanan, 1857-1861; Abraham Lincoln,
1861-1865"; etc. Her family came from North Carolina, and they had that
to feel superior about before they had Cressy. The Garnet "look," indeed,
though based upon a strong family resemblance, was nothing more than the
restless, preoccupied expression of an inflamed sense of importance. The
father was a Democrat, in the sense that other men were doctors or
lawyers. He scratched up some sort of poor living for his family behind
office windows inscribed with the words "Real Estate. Insurance.
Investments." But it was his political faith that, in a Republican
community, gave him his feeling of eminence and originality. The Garnet
children were all in school then, scattered along from the first grade
to the ninth. In almost any room of our school building you might chance
to enter, you saw the self-conscious little face of one or another of
them. They were restrained, uncomfortable children, not frankly boastful,
but insinuating, and somehow forever demanding special consideration and
holding grudges against teachers and classmates who did not show it them;
all but Cressida, who was naturally as sunny and open as a May morning.

It was no wonder that Cressy ran away with young Charley Wilton, who
hadn't a shabby thing about him except his health. He was her first
music teacher, the choir-master of the church in which she sang. Charley
was very handsome; the "romantic" son of an old, impoverished family. He
had refused to go into a good business with his uncles and had gone
abroad to study music when that was an extravagant and picturesque thing
for an Ohio boy to do. His letters home were handed round among the
members of his own family and of other families equally conservative.
Indeed, Charley and what his mother called "his music" were the romantic
expression of a considerable group of people; young cousins and old aunts
and quiet-dwelling neighbours, allied by the amity of several
generations. Nobody was properly married in our part of Columbus unless
Charley Wilton, and no other, played the wedding march. The old ladies of
the First Church used to say that he "hovered over the keys like a
spirit." At nineteen Cressida was beautiful enough to turn a much harder
head than the pale, ethereal one Charley Wilton bent above the organ.

That the chapter which began so gracefully ran on into such a stretch of
grim, hard prose, was simply Cressida's relentless bad luck. In her
undertakings, in whatever she could lay hold of with her two hands, she
was successful; but whatever happened to her was almost sure to be bad.
Her family, her husbands, her son, would have crushed any other woman I
have ever known. Cressida lived, more than most of us, "for others"; and
what she seemed to promote among her beneficiaries was indolence and envy
and discord--even dishonesty and turpitude.

Her sisters were fond of saying--at club luncheons--that Cressida had
remained "untouched by the breath of scandal," which was not strictly
true. There were captious people who objected to her long and close
association with Miletus Poppas. Her second husband, Ransome McChord, the
foreign representative of the great McChord Harvester Company, whom she
married in Germany, had so persistently objected to Poppas that she was
eventually forced to choose between them. Any one who knew her well could
easily understand why she chose Poppas.

While her actual self was the least changed, the least modified by
experience that it would be possible to imagine, there had been,
professionally, two Cressida Garnets; the big handsome girl, already
a "popular favourite" of the concert stage, who took with her to Germany
the raw material of a great voice;--and the accomplished artist who came
back. The singer that returned was largely the work of Miletus Poppas.
Cressida had at least known what she needed, hunted for it, found it, and
held fast to it. After experimenting with a score of teachers and
accompanists, she settled down to work her problem out with Poppas. Other
coaches came and went--she was always trying new ones--but Poppas
survived them all. Cressida was not musically intelligent; she never
became so. Who does not remember the countless rehearsals which were
necessary before she first sang _Isolde_ in Berlin; the disgust of the
conductor, the sullenness of the tenor, the rages of the blonde
_teufelin_, boiling with the impatience of youth and genius, who sang her
_Brangaena_ ? Everything but her driving power Cressida had to get from
the outside.

Poppas was, in his way, quite as incomplete as his pupil. He possessed a
great many valuable things for which there is no market; intuitions,
discrimination, imagination, a whole twilight world of intentions and
shadowy beginnings which were dark to Cressida. I remember that when
"Trilby" was published she fell into a fright and said such books ought
to be prohibited by law; which gave me an intimation of what their
relationship had actually become.

Poppas was indispensable to her. He was like a book in which she had
written down more about herself than she could possibly remember--and
it was information that she might need at any moment. He was the one
person who knew her absolutely and who saw into the bottom of her grief.
An artist's saddest secrets are those that have to do with his artistry.
Poppas knew all the simple things that were so desperately hard for
Cressida, all the difficult things in which she could count on herself;
her stupidities and inconsistencies, the chiaroscuro of the voice itself
and what could be expected from the mind somewhat mismated with it. He
knew where she was sound and where she was mended. With him she could
share the depressing knowledge of what a wretchedly faulty thing any
productive faculty is.

But if Poppas was necessary to her career, she was his career. By the
time Cressida left the Metropolitan Opera Company, Poppas was a rich
man. He had always received a retaining fee and a percentage of her
salary,--and he was a man of simple habits. Her liberality with Poppas
was one of the weapons that Horace and the Garnets used against Cressida,
and it was a point in the argument by which they justified to themselves
their rapacity. Whatever they didn't get, they told themselves, Poppas
would. What they got, therefore, they were only saving from Poppas. The
Greek ached a good deal at the general pillage, and Cressida's
conciliatory methods with her family made him sarcastic and spiteful. But
he had to make terms, somehow, with the Garnets and Horace, and with the
husband, if there happened to be one. He sometimes reminded them, when
they fell to wrangling, that they must not, after all, overturn the boat
under them, and that it would be better to stop just before they drove
her wild than just after. As he was the only one among them who
understood the sources of her fortune,--and they knew it,--he was able,
when it came to a general set-to, to proclaim sanctuary for the goose
that laid the golden eggs.

That Poppas had caused the break between Cressida and McChord was another
stick her sisters held over her. They pretended to understand perfectly,
and were always explaining what they termed her "separation"; but they
let Cressida know that it cast a shadow over her family and took a good
deal of living down.

A beautiful soundness of body, a seemingly exhaustless vitality, and a
certain "squareness" of character as well as of mind, gave Cressida
Garnet earning powers that were exceptional even in her lavishly rewarded
profession. Managers chose her over the heads of singers much more
gifted, because she was so sane, so conscientious, and above all, because
she was so sure. Her efficiency was like a beacon to lightly anchored
men, and in the intervals between her marriages she had as many suitors
as Penelope. Whatever else they saw in her at first, her competency so
impressed and delighted them that they gradually lost sight of everything
else. Her sterling character was the subject of her story. Once, as she
said, she very nearly escaped her destiny. With Blasius Bouchalka she
became almost another woman, but not quite. Her "principles," or his lack
of them, drove those two apart in the end. It was of Bouchalka that we
talked upon that last voyage I ever made with Cressida Garnet, and not of
Jerome Brown. She remembered the Bohemian kindly, and since it was the
passage in her life to which she most often reverted, it is the one I
shall relate here.


III

Late one afternoon in the winter of 189-, Cressida and I were walking in
Central Park after the first heavy storm of the year. The snow had been
falling thickly all the night before, and all day, until about four
o'clock. Then the air grew much warmer and the sky cleared. Overhead it
was a soft, rainy blue, and to the west a smoky gold. All around the
horizon everything became misty and silvery; even the big, brutal
buildings looked like pale violet water-colours on a silver ground. Under
the elm trees along the Mall the air was purple as wisterias. The
sheep-field, toward Broadway, was smooth and white, with a thin gold wash
over it. At five o'clock the carriage came for us, but Cressida sent the
driver home to the Tenth Street house with the message that she would
dine uptown, and that Horace and Mr. Poppas were not to wait for her.
As the horses trotted away we turned up the Mall.

"I won't go indoors this evening for any one," Cressida declared. "Not
while the sky is like that. Now we will go back to the laurel wood.
They are so black, over the snow, that I could cry for joy. I don't know
when I've felt so care-free as I feel tonight. Country winter, country
stars--they always make me think of Charley Wilton."

She was singing twice a week, sometimes oftener, at the Metropolitan that
season, quite at the flood-tide of her powers, and so enmeshed in
operatic routine that to be walking in the park at an unaccustomed hour,
unattended by one of the men of her entourage, seemed adventurous. As we
strolled along the little paths among the snow banks and the bronze
laurel bushes, she kept going back to my poor young cousin, dead so long.
"Things happen out of season. That's the worst of living. It was untimely
for both of us, and yet," she sighed softly, "since he had to die, I'm
not sorry. There was one beautifully happy year, though we were so poor,
and it gave him--something! It would have been too hard if he'd had to
miss everything." (I remember her simplicity, which never changed any
more than winter or Ohio change.) "Yes," she went on, "I always feel very
tenderly about Charley. I believe I'd do the same thing right over again,
even knowing all that had to come after. If I were nineteen tonight, I'd
rather go sleigh-riding with Charley Wilton than anything else I've ever
done."

We walked until the procession of carriages on the driveway, getting
people home to dinner, grew thin, and then we went slowly toward the
Seventh Avenue gate, still talking of Charley Wilton. We decided to dine
at a place not far away, where the only access from the street was a
narrow door, like a hole in the wall, between a tobacconist's and a
flower shop. Cressida deluded herself into believing that her incognito
was more successful in such non-descript places. She was wearing a long
sable coat, and a deep fur hat, hung with red cherries, which she had
brought from Russia. Her walk had given her a fine colour, and she
looked so much a personage that no disguise could have been wholly
effective.

The dining-rooms, frescoed with conventional Italian scenes, were built
round a court. The orchestra was playing as we entered and selected
our table. It was not a bad orchestra, and we were no sooner seated than
the first violin began to speak, to assert itself, as if it were suddenly
done with mediocrity.

"We have been recognized," Cressida said complacently. "What a good tone
he has, quite unusual. What does he look like ?" She sat with her back to
the musicians.

The violinist was standing, directing his men with his head and with the
beak of his violin. He was a tall, gaunt young man, big-boned and rugged,
in skin-tight clothes. His high forehead had a kind of luminous pallour,
and his hair was jet black and somewhat stringy. His manner was excited
and dramatic. At the end of the number he acknowledged the applause, and
Cressida looked at him graciously over her shoulder. He swept her with a
brilliant glance and bowed again. Then I noticed his red lips and thick
black eyebrows.

"He looks as if he were poor or in trouble," Cressida said. "See how
short his sleeves are, and how he mops his face as if the least thing
upset him. This is a hard winter for musicians."

The violinist rummaged among some music piled on a chair, turning over
the sheets with flurried rapidity, as if he were searching for a lost
article of which he was in desperate need. Presently he placed some
sheets upon the piano and began vehemently to explain something to the
pianist. The pianist stared at the music doubtfully--he was a plump old
man with a rosy, bald crown, and his shiny linen and neat tie made him
look as if he were on his way to a party. The violinist bent over him,
suggesting rhythms with his shoulders and running his bony finger up and
down the pages. When he stepped back to his place, I noticed that the
other players sat at ease, without raising their instruments.

"He is going to try something unusual," I commented. "It looks as if it
might be manuscript."

It was something, at all events, that neither of us had heard before,
though it was very much in the manner of the later Russian composers who
were just beginning to be heard in New York. The young man made a
brilliant dash of it, despite a lagging, scrambling accompaniment by the
conservative pianist. This time we both applauded him vigorously and
again, as he bowed, he swept us with his eye.

The usual repertory of restaurant music followed, varied by a charming
bit from Massenet's "Manon," then little known in this country. After we
paid our check, Cressida took out one of her visiting cards and wrote
across the top of it: _"We thank you for the unusual music and the
pleasure your playing has given us."_ She folded the card in the middle,
and asked the waiter to give it to the director of the orchestra. Pausing
at the door, while the porter dashed out to call a cab, we saw, in the
wall mirror, a pair of wild black eyes following us quite despairingly
from behind the palms at the other end of the room. Cressida observed as
we went out that the young man was probably having a hard struggle. "He
never got those clothes here, surely. They were probably made by a
country tailor in some little town in Austria. He seemed wild enough to
grab at anything, and was trying to make himself heard above the dishes,
poor fellow. There are so many like him. I wish I could help them all! I
didn't quite have the courage to send him money. His smile, when he bowed
to us, was not that of one who would take it, do you think ?"

"No," I admitted, "it wasn't. He seemed to be pleading for recognition. I
don't think it was money he wanted."

A week later I came upon some curious-looking manuscript songs on the
piano in Cressida's music room. The text was in some Slavic tongue with
a French translation written underneath. Both the handwriting and the
musical script were done in a manner experienced, even distinguished. I
was looking at them when Cressida came in.

"Oh, yes!" she exclaimed. "I meant to ask you to try them over. Poppas
thinks they are very interesting. They are from that young violinist,
you remember,--the one we noticed in the restaurant that evening. He sent
them with such a nice letter. His name is Blasius Bouchalka (Boú-kal-ka),
a Bohemian."

I sat down at the piano and busied myself with the manuscript, while
Cressida dashed off necessary notes and wrote checks in a large square
checkbook, six to a page. I supposed her immersed in sumptuary
preoccupations when she suddenly looked over her shoulder and said,
"Yes, that legend, _Sarka_, is the most interesting. Run it through a few
times and I'll try it over with you."

There was another, "_Dans les ombres des fôrets tristes_", which I
thought quite as beautiful. They were fine songs; very individual, and
each had that spontaneity which makes a song seem inevitable and, once
for all, "done." The accompaniments were difficult, but not unnecessarily
so; they were free from fatuous ingenuity and fine writing.

"I wish he'd indicated his tempi a little more clearly," I remarked as I
finished Sarka for the third time. "It matters, because he really has
something to say. An orchestral accompaniment would be better, I should
think."

"Yes, he sent the orchestral arrangement. Poppas has it. It works out
beautifully,--so much colour in the instrumentation. The English horn
comes in so effectively there," she rose and indicated the passage, "just
right with the voice. I've asked him to come next Sunday, so please be
here if you can. I want to know what you think of him."

Cressida was always at home to her friends on Sunday afternoon unless she
was billed for the evening concert at the Opera House, in which case we
were sufficiently advised by the daily press. Bouchalka must have been
told to come early, for when I arrived on Sunday, at four, he and
Cressida had the music-room quite to themselves and were standing by the
piano in earnest conversation. In a few moments they were separated by
other early comers, and I led Bouchalka across the hall to the
drawing-room. The guests, as they came in, glanced at him curiously. He
wore a dark blue suit, soft and rather baggy, with a short coat, and a
high double-breasted vest with two rows of buttons coming up to the loops
of his black tie. This costume was even more foreign-looking than his
skin-tight dress clothes, but it was more becoming. He spoke hurried,
elliptical English, and very good French. All his sympathies were French
rather than German--the Czecks lean to the one culture or to the other. I
found him a fierce, a transfixing talker. His brilliant eyes, his gaunt
hands, his white, deeply-lined forehead, all entered into his speech.

I asked him whether he had not recognized Madame Garnet at once when we
entered the restaurant that evening more than a week ago.

"_Mais, certainement!_ I hear her twice when she sings in the afternoon,
and sometimes at night for the last act. I have a friend who buys a
ticket for the first part, and he comes out and gives to me his pass-back
check, and I return for the last act. That is convenient if I am broke."
He explained the trick with amusement but without embarrassment, as if it
were a shift that we might any of us be put to.

I told him that I admired his skill with the violin, but his songs much
more.

He threw out his red under-lip and frowned. "Oh, I have no instrument!
The violin I play from necessity; the flute, the piano, as it happens.
For three years now I write all the time, and it spoils the hand for
violin."

When the maid brought him his tea, he took both muffins and cakes and
told me that he was very hungry. He had to lunch and dine at the place
where he played, and he got very tired of the food. "But since," his
black eyebrows nearly met in an acute angle, "but since, before, I eat
at a bakery, with the slender brown roach on the pie, I guess I better
let alone well enough." He paused to drink his tea; as he tasted one of
the cakes his face lit with sudden animation and he gazed across the hall
after the maid with the tray--she was now holding it before the aged and
ossified 'cellist of the Hempfstangle Quartette. "_Des gâteaux_" he
murmured feelingly, "_ou est-ce qu'elle peut trouver de tels gâteaux ici
â_ New York ?"

I explained to him that Madame Garnet had an accomplished cook who made
them,--an Austrian, I thought.

He shook his head. "_Austrichienne ? Je ne pense pas._"

Cressida was approaching with the new Spanish soprano, Mme. Bartolas, who
was all black velvet and long black feathers, with a lace veil over her
rich pallour and even a little black patch on her chin. I beckoned them.
"Tell me, Cressida, isn't Ruzenka an Austrian ?"

She looked surprised. "No, a Bohemian, though I got her in Vienna."
Bouchalka's expression, and the remnant of a cake in his long fingers,
gave her the connection. She laughed. "You like them ? Of course, they are
of your own country. You shall have more of them." She nodded and went
away to greet a guest who had just come in.

A few moments later, Horace, then a beautiful lad in Eton clothes,
brought another cup of tea and a plate of cakes for Bouchalka. We sat
down in a corner, and talked about his songs. He was neither boastful nor
deprecatory. He knew exactly in what respects they were excellent. I
decided as I watched his face, that he must be under thirty. The deep
lines in his forehead probably came there from his habit of frowning
densely when he struggled to express himself, and suddenly elevating his
coal-black eyebrows when his ideas cleared. His teeth were white, very
irregular and interesting. The corrective methods of modern dentistry
would have taken away half his good looks. His mouth would have been
much less attractive for any re-arranging of those long, narrow,
over-crowded teeth. Along with his frown and his way of thrusting out his
lip, they contributed, somehow, to the engaging impetuousness of his
conversation. As we talked about his songs, his manner changed. Before
that he had seemed responsive and easily pleased. Now he grew abstracted,
as if I had taken away his pleasant afternoon and wakened him to his
miseries. He moved restlessly in his clothes. When I mentioned Puccini,
he held his head in his hands.

"Why is it they like that always and always ? A little, oh yes, very nice.
But so much, always the same thing! Why ?" He pierced me with the
despairing glance which had followed us out of the restaurant.

I asked him whether he had sent any of his songs to the publishers and
named one whom I knew to be discriminating. He shrugged his shoulders.
"They not want Bohemian songs. They not want my music. Even the street
cars will not stop for me here, like for other people. Every time, I wait
on the corner until somebody else make a signal to the car, and then it
stop,--but not for me."

Most people cannot become utterly poor; whatever happens, they can right
themselves a little. But one felt that Bouchalka was the sort of person
who might actually starve or blow his brains out. Something very
important had been left out either of his make-up or of his education;
something that we are not accustomed to miss in people.

Gradually the parlour was filled with little groups of friends, and I
took Bouchalka back to the music-room where Cressida was surrounded by
her guests; feathered women, with large sleeves and hats, young men of no
importance, in frock coats, with shining hair, and the smile which is
intended to say so many flattering things but which really expresses
little more than a desire to get on. The older men were standing about
waiting for a word _à deux_ with the hostess. To these people Bouchalka
had nothing to say. He stood stiffly at the outer edge of the circle,
watching Cressida with intent, impatient eyes, until, under the pretext
of showing him a score, she drew him into the alcove at the back end of
the long room, where she kept her musical library. The bookcases ran from
the floor to the ceiling. There was a table and a reading-lamp, and a
window seat looking upon the little walled garden. Two persons could be
quite withdrawn there, and yet be a part of the general friendly scene.
Cressida took a score from the shelf, and sat down with Bouchalka upon
the window seat, the book open between them, though neither of them
looked at it again. They fell to talking with great earnestness. At last
the Bohemian pulled out a large, yellowing silver watch, held it up
before him, and stared at it a moment as if it were an object of horror.
He sprang up, bent over Cressida's hand and murmured something, dashed
into the hall and out of the front door without waiting for the maid to
open it. He had worn no overcoat, apparently. It was then seven o'clock;
he would surely be late at his post in the up-town restaurant. I hoped he
would have wit enough to take the elevated.

After supper Cressida told me his story. His parents, both poor
musicians,--the mother a singer--died while he was yet a baby, and he
was left to the care of an arbitrary uncle who resolved to make a priest
of him. He was put into a monastery school and kept there. The organist
and choir-director, fortunately for Blasius, was an excellent musician, a
man who had begun his career brilliantly, but who had met with crushing
sorrows and disappointments in the world. He devoted himself to his
talented pupil, and was the only teacher the young man ever had. At
twenty-one, when he was ready for the novitiate, Blasius felt that the
call of life was too strong for him, and he ran away out into a world
of which he knew nothing. He tramped southward to Vienna, begging and
playing his fiddle from town to town. In Vienna he fell in with a gipsy
band which was being recruited for a Paris restaurant and went with them
to Paris. He played in cafés and in cheap theatres, did transcribing for
a music publisher, tried to get pupils. For four years he was the mouse,
and hunger was the cat. She kept him on the jump. When he got work he
did not understand why; when he lost a job he did not understand why.
During the time when most of us acquire a practical sense, get a
half-unconscious knowledge of hard facts and market values, he had been
shut away from the world, fed like the pigeons in the bell-tower of his
monastery. Bouchalka had now been in New York a year, and for all he knew
about it, Cressida said, he might have landed the day before yesterday.

Several weeks went by, and as Bouchalka did not reappear on Tenth Street,
Cressida and I went once more to the place where he had played, only to
find another violinist leading the orchestra. We summoned the proprietor,
a Swiss-Italian, polite and solicitous. He told us the gentleman was not
playing there any more,--was playing somewhere else, but he had forgotten
where. We insisted upon talking to the old pianist, who at last
reluctantly admitted that the Bohemian had been dismissed. He had arrived
very late one Sunday night three weeks ago, and had hot words with the
proprietor. He had been late before, and had been warned. He was a very
talented fellow, but wild and not to be depended upon. The old man gave
us the address of a French boarding-house on Seventh Avenue where
Bouchalka used to room. We drove there at once, but the woman who kept
the place said that he had gone away two weeks before, leaving no
address, as he never got letters. Another Bohemian, who did engraving
on glass, had a room with her, and when he came home perhaps he could
tell where Bouchalka was, for they were friends.

It took us several days to run Bouchalka down, but when we did find him
Cressida promptly busied herself in his behalf. She sang his _"Sarka"_
with the Metropolitan Opera orchestra at a Sunday night concert, she got
him a position with the Symphony Orchestra, and persuaded the
conservative Hempfstangle Quartette to play one of his chamber
compositions from manuscript. She aroused the interest of a publisher in
his work, and introduced him to people who were helpful to him.

By the new year Bouchalka was fairly on his feet. He had proper clothes
now, and Cressida's friends found him attractive. He was usually at her
house on Sunday afternoons; so usually, indeed, that Poppas began
pointedly to absent himself. When other guests arrived, the Bohemian and
his patroness were always found at the critical point of discussion,--at
the piano, by the fire, in the alcove at the end of the room--both of
them interested and animated. He was invariably respectful and admiring,
deferring to her in every tone and gesture, and she was perceptibly
pleased and flattered,--as if all this were new to her and she were
tasting the sweetness of a first success.

One wild day in March Cressida burst tempestuously into my apartment and
threw herself down, declaring that she had just come from the most trying
rehearsal she had ever lived through. When I tried to question her about
it, she replied absently and continued to shiver and crouch by the fire.
Suddenly she rose, walked to the window, and stood looking out over the
Square, glittering with ice and rain and strewn with the wrecks of
umbrellas. When she turned again, she approached me with determination.

"I shall have to ask you to go with me," she said firmly. "That crazy
Bouchalka has gone and got a pleurisy or something. It may be pneumonia;
there is an epidemic of it just now. I've sent Dr. Brooks to him, but I
can never tell anything from what a doctor says. I've got to see
Bouchalka and his nurse, and what sort of place he's in. I've been
rehearsing all day and I'm singing tomorrow night; I can't have so much
on my mind. Can you come with me ? It will save time in the end."

I put on my furs, and we went down to Cressida's carriage, waiting below.
She gave the driver a number on Seventh Avenue, and then began feeling
her throat with the alarmed expression which meant that she was not going
to talk. We drove in silence to the address, and by this time it was
growing dark. The French landlady was a cordial, comfortable person who
took Cressida in at a glance and seemed much impressed. Cressida's
incognito was never successful. Her black gown was inconspicuous enough,
but over it she wore a dark purple velvet carriage coat, lined with fur
and furred at the cuffs and collar. The Frenchwoman's eye ran over it
delightedly and scrutinized the veil which only half-concealed the
well-known face behind it. She insisted upon conducting us up to the
fourth floor herself, running ahead of us and turning up the gas jets in
the dark, musty-smelling halls. I suspect that she tarried outside the
door after we sent the nurse for her walk.

We found the sick man in a great walnut bed, a relic of the better days
which this lodging house must have seen. The grimy red plush carpet, the
red velvet chairs with broken springs, the double gilt-framed mirror
above the mantel, had all been respectable, substantial contributions to
comfort in their time. The fireplace was now empty and grateless, and an
ill-smelling gas stove burned in its sooty recess under the cracked
marble. The huge arched windows were hung with heavy red curtains, pinned
together and lightly stirred by the wind which rattled the loose frames.

I was examining these things while Cressida bent over Bouchalka. Her
carriage cloak she threw over the foot of his bed, either from a
protective impulse, or because there was no place else to put it. After
she had greeted him and seated herself, the sick man reached down and
drew the cloak up over him, looking at it with weak, childish pleasure
and stroking the velvet with his long fingers. "_Couleur de gloire,
couleur des reines!_" I heard him murmur. He thrust the sleeve under his
chin and closed his eyes. His loud, rapid breathing was the only sound in
the room. If Cressida brushed back his hair or touched his hand, he
looked up long enough to give her a smile of utter adoration, naive and
uninquiring, as if he were smiling at a dream or a miracle.

The nurse was gone for an hour, and we sat quietly, Cressida with her
eyes fixed on Bouchalka, and I absorbed in the strange atmosphere of the
house, which seemed to seep in under the door and through the walls.
Occasionally we heard a call for "_de l'eau chaude_!" and the heavy trot
of a serving woman on the stairs. On the floor below somebody was
struggling with Schubert's Marche Militaire on a coarse-toned upright
piano. Sometimes, when a door was opened, one could hear a parrot
screaming, "_Voilà, voilà, tonnerre!_" The house was built before 1870,
as one could tell from windows and mouldings, and the walls were thick.
The sounds were not disturbing and Bouchalka was probably used to them.

When the nurse returned and we rose to go, Bouchalka still lay with his
cheek on her cloak, and Cressida left it. "It seems to please him," she
murmured as we went down the stairs. "I can go home without a wrap. It's
not far." I had, of course, to give her my furs, as I was not singing
_Donna Anna_ tomorrow evening and she was.

After this I was not surprised by any devout attitude in which I happened
to find the Bohemian when I entered Cressida's music-room unannounced,
or by any radiance on her face when she rose from the window-seat in the
alcove and came down the room to greet me.

Bouchalka was, of course, very often at the Opera now. On almost any
night when Cressida sang, one could see his narrow black head--high
above the temples and rather constrained behind the ears--peering from
some part of the house. I used to wonder what he thought of Cressida as
an artist, but probably he did not think seriously at all. A great voice,
a handsome woman, a great prestige, all added together made a "great
artist," the common synonym for success. Her success, and the material
evidences of it, quite blinded him. I could never draw from him anything
adequate about Anna Straka, Cressida's Slavic rival, and this perhaps
meant that he considered comparison disloyal. All the while that Cressida
was singing reliably, and satisfying the management, Straka was singing
uncertainly and making history. Her voice was primarily defective, and
her immediate vocal method was bad. Cressida was always living up to her
contract, delivering the whole order in good condition; while the Slav
was sometimes almost voiceless, sometimes inspired. She put you off with
a hope, a promise, time after time. But she was quite as likely to put
you off with a revelation,--with an interpretation that was inimitable,
unrepeatable.

Bouchalka was not a reflective person. He had his own idea of what a
great prima donna should be like, and he took it for granted that Mme.
Garnet corresponded to his conception. The curious thing was that he
managed to impress his idea upon Cressida herself. She began to see
herself as he saw her, to try to be like the notion of her that he
carried somewhere in that pointed head of his. She was exalted quite
beyond herself. Things that had been chilled under the grind came to life
in her that winter, with the breath of Bouchalka's adoration. Then, if
ever in her life, she heard the bird sing on the branch outside her
window; and she wished she were younger, lovelier, freer. She wished
there were no Poppas, no Horace, no Garnets. She longed to be only the
bewitching creature Bouchalka imagined her.

One April day when we were driving in the Park, Cressida, superb in a
green-and-primrose costume hurried over from Paris, turned to me smiling
and said: "Do you know, this is the first spring I haven't dreaded. It's
the first one I've ever really had. Perhaps people never have more than
one, whether it comes early or late." She told me that she was
overwhelmingly in love.

Our visit to Bouchalka when he was ill had, of course, been reported, and
the men about the Opera House had made of it the only story they have the
wit to invent. They could no more change the pattern of that story than
the spider could change the design of its web. But being, as she said,
"in love" suggested to Cressida only one plan of action; to have the
Tenth Street house done over, to put more money into her brothers'
business, send Horace to school, raise Poppas' percentage, and then with
a clear conscience be married in the Church of the Ascension. She went
through this program with her usual thoroughness. She was married in June
and sailed immediately with her husband. Poppas was to join them in
Vienna in August, when she would begin to work again. From her letters I
gathered that all was going well, even beyond her hopes.

When they returned in October, both Cressida and Blasius seemed changed
for the better. She was perceptibly freshened and renewed. She attacked
her work at once with more vigour and more ease; did not drive herself so
relentlessly. A little carelessness became her wonderfully. Bouchalka was
less gaunt, and much less flighty and perverse. His frank pleasure in the
comfort and order of his wife's establishment was ingratiating, even if
it was a little amusing. Cressida had the sewing-room at the top of the
house made over into a study for him. When I went up there to see him, I
usually found him sitting before the fire or walking about with his hands
in his coat pockets, admiring his new possessions. He explained the
ingenious arrangement of his study to me a dozen times.

With Cressida's friends and guests, Bouchalka assumed nothing for
himself. His deportment amounted to a quiet, unobtrusive appreciation of
her and of his good fortune. He was proud to owe his wife so much.
Cressida's Sunday afternoons were more popular than ever, since she
herself had so much more heart for them. Bouchalka's picturesque presence
stimulated her graciousness and charm. One still found them conversing
together as eagerly as in the days when they saw each other but seldom.
Consequently their guests were never bored. We felt as if the Tenth
Street house had a pleasant climate quite its own. In the spring, when
the Metropolitan company went on tour, Cressida's husband accompanied
her, and afterward they again sailed for Genoa.

During the second winter people began to say that Bouchalka was becoming
too thoroughly domesticated, and that since he was growing heavier in
body he was less attractive. I noticed his increasing reluctance to stir
abroad. Nobody could say that he was "wild" now. He seemed to dread
leaving the house, even for an evening. Why should he go out, he said,
when he had everything he wanted at home ? He published very little. One
was given to understand that he was writing an opera. He lived in the
Tenth Street house like a tropical plant under glass. Nowhere in New York
could he get such cookery as Ruzenka's. Ruzenka ("little Rose") had,
like her mistress, bloomed afresh, now that she had a man and a
compatriot to cook for. Her invention was tireless, and she took things
with a high hand in the kitchen, confident of a perfect appreciation. She
was a plump, fair, blue-eyed girl, giggly and easily flattered, with
teeth like cream. She was passionately domestic, and her mind was full of
homely stories and proverbs and superstitions which she somehow worked
into her cookery. She and Bouchalka had between them a whole literature
of traditions about sauces and fish and pastry. The cellar was full of
the wines he liked, and Ruzenka always knew what wines to serve with the
dinner. Blasius' monastery had been famous for good living.

That winter was a very cold one, and I think the even temperature of the
house enslaved Bouchalka. "Imagine it," he once said to me when I dropped
in during a blinding snowstorm and found him reading before the fire. "To
be warm all the time, every day! It is like Aladdin. In Paris I have had
weeks together when I was not warm once, when I did not have a bath once,
like the cats in the street. The nights were a misery. People have
terrible dreams when they are so cold. Here I waken up in the night so
warm I do not know what it means. Her door is open, and I turn on my
light. I cannot believe in myself until I see that she is there."

I began to think that Bouchalka's wildness had been the desperation which
the tamest animals exhibit when they are tortured or terrorized.
Naturally luxurious, he had suffered more than most men under the pinch
of penury. Those first beautiful compositions, full of the folk-music of
his own country, had been wrung out of him by home-sickness and
heart-ache. I wondered whether he could compose only under the spur of
hunger and loneliness, and whether his talent might not subside with his
despair. Some such apprehension must have troubled Cressida, though his
gratitude would have been propitiatory to a more exacting task-master.
She had always liked to make people happy, and he was the first one who
had accepted her bounty without sourness. When he did not accompany her
upon her spring tour, Cressida said it was because travelling interfered
with composition; but I felt that she was deeply disappointed. Blasius,
or Bla[vz]ej, as his wife had with difficulty learned to call him, was
not showy or extravagant. He hated hotels, even the best of them.
Cressida had always fought for the hearthstone and the fireside, and the
humour of Destiny is sometimes to give us too much of what we desire. I
believe she would have preferred even enthusiasm about other women to his
utter _oisiveté_. It was his old fire, not his docility, that had won
her.

During the third season after her marriage Cressida had only twenty-five
performances at the Metropolitan, and she was singing out of town a great
deal. Her husband did not bestir himself to accompany her, but he
attended, very faithfully, to her correspondence and to her business at
home. He had no ambitious schemes to increase her fortune, and he carried
out her directions exactly. Nevertheless, Cressida faced her concert
tours somewhat grimly, and she seldom talked now about their plans for
the future.

The crisis in this growing estrangement came about by accident,--one of
those chance occurrences that affect our lives more than years of ordered
effort,--and it came in an inverted form of a situation old to comedy.
Cressida had been on the road for several weeks; singing in Minneapolis,
Cleveland, St. Paul, then up into Canada and back to Boston. From Boston
she was to go directly to Chicago, coming down on the five o'clock train
and taking the eleven, over the Lake Shore, for the West. By her schedule
she would have time to change cars comfortably at the Grand Central
station.

On the journey down from Boston she was seized with a great desire to see
Blasius. She decided, against her custom, one might say against her
principles, to risk a performance with the Chicago orchestra without
rehearsal, to stay the night in New York and go west by the afternoon
train the next day. She telegraphed Chicago, but she did not telegraph
Blasius, because she wished--the old fallacy of affection!--to "surprise"
him. She could take it for granted that, at eleven on a cold winter
night, he would be in the Tenth Street house and nowhere else in New
York. She sent Poppas--paler than usual with accusing scorn--and her
trunks on to Chicago, and with only her travelling bag and a sense of
being very audacious in her behaviour and still very much in love, she
took a cab for Tenth Street.

Since it was her intention to disturb Blasius as little as possible and
to delight him as much as possible, she let herself in with her latch-key
and went directly to his room. She did not find him there. Indeed, she
found him where he should not have been at all. There must have been a
trying scene.

Ruzenka was sent away in the morning, and the other two maids as well. By
eight o'clock Cressida and Bouchalka had the house to themselves. Nobody
had any breakfast. Cressida took the afternoon train to keep her
engagement with Theodore Thomas, and to think over the situation. Blasius
was left in the Tenth Street house with only the furnace man's wife to
look after him. His explanation of his conduct was that he had been
drinking too much. His digression, he swore, was casual. It had never
occurred before, and he could only appeal to his wife's magnanimity. But
it was, on the whole, easier for Cressida to be firm than to be yielding,
and she knew herself too well to attempt a readjustment. She had never
made shabby compromises, and it was too late for her to begin. When she
returned to New York she went to a hotel, and she never saw Bouchalka
alone again. Since he admitted her charge, the legal formalities were
conducted so quietly that the granting of her divorce was announced in
the morning papers before her friends knew that there was the least
likelihood of one. Cressida's concert tours had interrupted the
hospitalities of the house.

While the lawyers were arranging matters, Bouchalka came to see me. He
was remorseful and miserable enough, and I think his perplexity was quite
sincere. If there had been an intrigue with a woman of her own class, an
infatuation, an affair, he said, he could understand. But anything so
venial and accidental--He shook his head slowly back and forth. He
assured me that he was not at all himself on that fateful evening, and
that when he recovered himself he would have sent Ruzenka away, making
proper provision for her, of course. It was an ugly thing, but ugly
things sometimes happened in one's life, and one had to put them away and
forget them. He could have overlooked any accident that might have
occurred when his wife was on the road, with Poppas, for example. I cut
him short, and he bent his head to my reproof.

"I know," he said, "such things are different with her. But when have I
said that I am noble as she is ? Never. But I have appreciated and I have
adored. About me, say what you like. But if you say that in this there
was any _méprise_ to my wife, that is not true. I have lost all my place
here. I came in from the streets; but I understand her, and all the fine
things in her, better than any of you here. If that accident had not
been, she would have lived happy with me for years. As for me, I have
never believed in this happiness. I was not born under a good star.
How did it come ? By accident. It goes by accident. She tried to give good
fortune to an unfortunate man, _un miserable_; that was her mistake. It
cannot be done in this world. The lucky should marry the lucky."
Bouchalka stopped and lit a cigarette. He sat sunk in my chair as if he
never meant to get up again. His large hands, now so much plumper than
when I first knew him, hung limp. When he had consumed his cigarette he
turned to me again.

"I, too, have tried. Have I so much as written one note to a lady since
she first put out her hand to help me ? Some of the artists who sing my
compositions have been quite willing to plague my wife a little if I make
the least sign. With the Española, for instance, I have had to be very
stern, _farouche_; she is so very playful. I have never given my wife the
slightest annoyance of this kind. Since I married her, I have not kissed
the cheek of one lady! Then one night I am bored and drink too much
champagne and I become a fool. What does it matter ? Did my wife marry the
fool of me ? No, she married me, with my mind and my feelings all here, as
I am today. But she is getting a divorce from the fool of me, which she
would never see _anyhow_! The stupidity which excuse me is the thing she
will not overlook. Even in her memory of me she will be harsh."

His view of his conduct and its consequences was fatalistic: he was meant
to have just so much misery every day of his life; for three years it had
been withheld, had been piling up somewhere, underground, overhead; now
the accumulation burst over him. He had come to pay his respects to me,
he said, to declare his undying gratitude to Madame Garnet, and to bid
me farewell. He took up his hat and cane and kissed my hand. I have never
seen him since. Cressida made a settlement upon him, but even Poppas,
tortured by envy and curiosity, never discovered how much it was. It was
very little, she told me. "_Pour des gâteaux,_" she added with a smile
that was not unforgiving. She could not bear to think of his being in
want when so little could make him comfortable.

He went back to his own village in Bohemia. He wrote her that the old
monk, his teacher, was still alive, and that from the windows of his room
in the town he could see the pigeons flying forth from and back to the
monastery bell-tower all day long. He sent her a song, with his own
words, about those pigeons,--quite a lovely thing. He was the bell tower,
and _les colombes_ were his memories of her.


IV

Jerome Brown proved, on the whole, the worst of Cressida's husbands, and,
with the possible exception of her eldest brother, Buchanan Garnet, he
was the most rapacious of the men with whom she had had to do. It was one
thing to gratify every wish of a cake-loving fellow like Bouchalka, but
quite another to stand behind a financier. And Brown would be a financier
or nothing. After her marriage with him, Cressida grew rapidly older. For
the first time in her life she wanted to go abroad and live--to get
Jerome Brown away from the scene of his unsuccessful but undiscouraged
activities. But Brown was not a man who could be amused and kept out of
mischief in Continental hotels. He had to be a figure, if only a "mark,"
in Wall street. Nothing else would gratify his peculiar vanity. The
deeper he went in, the more affectionately he told Cressida that now all
her cares and anxieties were over. To try to get related facts out of his
optimism was like trying to find framework in a feather bed. All Cressida
knew was that she was perpetually "investing" to save investments. When
she told me she had put a mortgage on the Tenth Street house, her eyes
filled with tears. "Why is it ? I have never cared about money, except to
make people happy with it, and it has been the curse of my life. It has
spoiled all my relations with people. Fortunately," she added
irrelevantly, drying her eyes, "Jerome and Poppas get along well." Jerome
could have got along with anybody; that is a promoter's business. His
warm hand, his flushed face, his bright eye, and his newest funny
story,--Poppas had no weapons that could do execution with a man like
that.

Though Brown's ventures never came home, there was nothing openly
disastrous until the outbreak of the revolution in Mexico jeopardized
his interests there. Then Cressida went to England--where she could
always raise money from a faithful public--for a winter concert tour.
When she sailed, her friends knew that her husband's affairs were in a
bad way; but we did not know how bad until after Cressida's death.

Cressida Garnet, as all the world knows, was lost on the _Titanic_.
Poppas and Horace, who had been travelling with her, were sent on a week
earlier and came as safely to port as if they had never stepped out of
their London hotel. But Cressida had waited for the first trip of the sea
monster--she still believed that all advertising was good--and she went
down on the road between the old world and the new. She had been ill, and
when the collision occurred she was in her stateroom, a modest one
somewhere down in the boat, for she was travelling economically.
Apparently she never left her cabin. She was not seen on the decks, and
none of the survivors brought any word of her.

On Monday, when the wireless messages were coming from the _Carpathia_
with the names of the passengers who had been saved, I went, with so
many hundred others, down to the White Star offices. There I saw
Cressida's motor, her redoubtable initials on the door, with four men
sitting in the limousine. Jerome Brown, stripped of the promoter's
joviality and looking flabby and old, sat behind with Buchanan Garnet,
who had come on from Ohio. I had not seen him for years. He was now an
old man, but he was still conscious of being in the public eye, and sat
turning a cigar about in his face with that foolish look of importance
which Cressida's achievement had stamped upon all the Garnets. Poppas was
in front, with Horace. He was gnawing the finger of his chamois glove as
it rested on the top of his cane. His head was sunk, his shoulders drawn
together; he looked as old as Jewry. I watched them, wondering whether
Cressida would come back to them if she could. After the last names were
posted, the four men settled back into the powerful car--one of the best
made--and the chauffeur backed off. I saw him dash away the tears from
his face with the back of his driving glove. He was an Irish boy, and had
been devoted to Cressida.

When the will was read, Henry Gilbert, the lawyer, an old friend of her
early youth, and I, were named executors. A nice job we had of it. Most
of her large fortune had been converted into stocks that were almost
worthless. The marketable property realized only a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars. To defeat the bequest of fifty thousand dollars to
Poppas, Jerome Brown and her family contested the will. They brought
Cressida's letters into court to prove that the will did not represent
her intentions, often expressed in writing through many years, to
"provide well" for them.

Such letters they were! The writing of a tired, overdriven woman;
promising money, sending money herewith, asking for an acknowledgment
of the draft sent last month, etc. In the letters to Jerome Brown she
begged for information about his affairs and entreated him to go with her
to some foreign city where they could live quietly and where she could
rest; if they were careful, there would "be enough for all." Neither
Brown nor her brothers and sisters had any sense of shame about these
letters. It seemed never to occur to them that this golden stream,
whether it rushed or whether it trickled, came out of the industry, out
of the mortal body of a woman. They regarded her as a natural source
of wealth; a copper vein, a diamond mine.

Henry Gilbert is a good lawyer himself, and he employed an able man to
defend the will. We determined that in this crisis we would stand by
Poppas, believing it would be Cressida's wish. Out of the lot of them, he
was the only one who had helped her to make one penny of the money that
had brought her so much misery. He was at least more deserving than the
others. We saw to it that Poppas got his fifty thousand, and he actually
departed, at last, for his city in la sainte Asie, where it never rains
and where he will never again have to hold a hot water bottle to his
face.

The rest of the property was fought for to a finish. Poppas out of the
way, Horace and Brown and the Garnets quarrelled over her personal
effects. They went from floor to floor of the Tenth Street house. The
will provided that Cressida's jewels and furs and gowns were to go to her
sisters. Georgie and Julia wrangled over them down to the last moleskin.
They were deeply disappointed that some of the muffs and stoles which
they remembered as very large, proved, when exhumed from storage and
exhibited beside furs of a modern cut, to be ridiculously scant. A year
ago the sisters were still reasoning with each other about pearls and
opals and emeralds.

I wrote Poppas some account of these horrors, as during the court
proceedings we had become rather better friends than of old. His reply
arrived only a few days ago; a photograph of himself upon a camel, under
which is written:

    Traulich und Treu
    ist's nur in der Tiefe:
    falsch und feig
ist was dort oben sich freut!

His reply, and the memories it awakens--memories which have followed
Poppas into the middle of Asia, seemingly,--prompted this informal
narration.




A Gold Slipper




Marshall McKann followed his wife and her friend Mrs. Post down the
aisle and up the steps to the stage of the Carnegie Music Hall with an
ill-concealed feeling of grievance. Heaven knew he never went to
concerts, and to be mounted upon the stage in this fashion, as if he were
a "highbrow" from Sewickley, or some unfortunate with a musical wife, was
ludicrous. A man went to concerts when he was courting, while he was a
junior partner. When he became a person of substance he stopped that sort
of nonsense. His wife, too, was a sensible person, the daughter of an old
Pittsburgh family as solid and well-rooted as the McKanns. She would
never have bothered him about this concert had not the meddlesome Mrs.
Post arrived to pay her a visit. Mrs. Post was an old school friend of
Mrs. McKann, and because she lived in Cincinnati she was always keeping
up with the world and talking about things in which no one else was
interested, music among them. She was an aggressive lady, with weighty
opinions, and a deep voice like a jovial bassoon. She had arrived only
last night, and at dinner she brought it out that she could on no account
miss Kitty Ayrshire's recital; it was, she said, the sort of thing no one
could afford to miss.

When McKann went into town in the morning he found that every seat in the
music-hall was sold. He telephoned his wife to that effect, and, thinking
he had settled the matter, made his reservation on the 11.25 train for
New York. He was unable to get a drawing-room because this same Kitty
Ayrshire had taken the last one. He had not intended going to New York
until the following week, but he preferred to be absent during Mrs.
Post's incumbency.

In the middle of the morning, when he was deep in his correspondence,
his wife called him up to say the enterprising Mrs. Post had telephoned
some musical friends in Sewickley and had found that two hundred
folding-chairs were to be placed on the stage of the concert-hall, behind
the piano, and that they would be on sale at noon. Would he please get
seats in the front row ? McKann asked if they would not excuse him, since
he was going over to New York on the late train, would be tired, and
would not have time to dress, etc. No, not at all. It would be foolish
for two women to trail up to the stage unattended. Mrs. Post's husband
always accompanied her to concerts, and she expected that much attention
from her host. He needn't dress, and he could take a taxi from the
concert-hall to the East Liberty station.

The outcome of it all was that, though his bag was at the station, here
was McKann, in the worst possible humour, facing the large audience to
which he was well known, and sitting among a lot of music students and
excitable old maids. Only the desperately zealous or the morbidly curious
would endure two hours in those wooden chairs, and he sat in the front
row of this hectic body, somehow made a party to a transaction for which
he had the utmost contempt.

When McKann had been in Paris, Kitty Ayrshire was singing at the Comique,
and he wouldn't go to hear her--even there, where one found so little
that was better to do. She was too much talked about, too much
advertised; always being thrust in an American's face as if she were
something to be proud of. Perfumes and petticoats and cutlets were named
for her. Some one had pointed Kitty out to him one afternoon when she was
driving in the Bois with a French composer--old enough, he judged, to be
her father--who was said to be infatuated, carried away by her. McKann
was told that this was one of the historic passions of old age. He had
looked at her on that occasion, but she was so befrilled and befeathered
that he caught nothing but a graceful outline and a small, dark head
above a white ostrich boa. He had noted with disgust, however, the
stooped shoulders and white imperial of the silk-hatted man beside her,
and the senescent line of his back. McKann described to his wife this
unpleasing picture only last night, while he was undressing, when he was
making every possible effort to avert this concert party. But Bessie
only looked superior and said she wished to hear Kitty Ayrshire sing, and
that her "private life" was something in which she had no interest.

Well, here he was; hot and uncomfortable, in a chair much too small for
him, with a row of blinding footlights glaring in his eyes. Suddenly the
door at his right elbow opened. Their seats were at one end of the front
row; he had thought they would be less conspicuous there than in the
centre, and he had not foreseen that the singer would walk over him every
time she came upon the stage. Her velvet train brushed against his
trousers as she passed him. The applause which greeted her was neither
overwhelming nor prolonged. Her conservative audience did not know
exactly how to accept her toilette. They were accustomed to dignified
concert gowns, like those which Pittsburgh matrons (in those days!) wore
at their daughters' coming-out teas.

Kitty's gown that evening was really quite outrageous--the repartée of a
conscienceless Parisian designer who took her hint that she wished
something that would be entirely novel in the States. Today, after we
have all of us, even in the uttermost provinces, been educated by Baskt
and the various Ballets Russes, we would accept such a gown without
distrust; but then it was a little disconcerting, even to the
well-disposed. It was constructed of a yard or two of green velvet--a
reviling, shrieking green which would have made a fright of any woman
who had not inextinguishable beauty--and it was made without armholes, a
device to which we were then so unaccustomed that it was nothing less
than alarming. The velvet skirt split back from a transparent gold-lace
petticoat, gold stockings, gold slippers. The narrow train was,
apparently, looped to both ankles, and it kept curling about her feet
like a serpent's tail, turning up its gold lining as if it were squirming
over on its back. It was not, we felt, a costume in which to sing Mozart
and Handel and Beethoven.

Kitty sensed the chill in the air, and it amused her. She liked to be
thought a brilliant artist by other artists, but by the world at large
she liked to be thought a daring creature. She had every reason to
believe, from experience and from example, that to shock the great crowd
was the surest way to get its money and to make her name a household
word. Nobody ever became a household word of being an artist, surely; and
you were not a thoroughly paying proposition until your name meant
something on the sidewalk and in the barber-shop. Kitty studied her
audience with an appraising eye. She liked the stimulus of this
disapprobation. As she faced this hard-shelled public she felt keen and
interested; she knew that she would give such a recital as cannot often
be heard for money. She nodded gaily to the young man at the piano, fell
into an attitude of seriousness, and began the group of Beethoven and
Mozart songs.

Though McKann would not have admitted it, there were really a great many
people in the concert-hall who knew what the prodigal daughter of their
country was singing, and how well she was doing it. They thawed gradually
under the beauty of her voice and the subtlety of her interpretation.
She had sung seldom in concert then, and they had supposed her very
dependent upon the accessories of the opera. Clean singing, finished
artistry, were not what they expected from her. They began to feel, even,
the wayward charm of her personality.

McKann, who stared coldly up at the balconies during her first song,
during the second glanced cautiously at the green apparition before him.
He was vexed with her for having retained a débutante figure. He
comfortably classed all singers--especially operatic singers--as "fat
Dutchwomen" or "shifty Sadies," and Kitty would not fit into his clever
generalization. She displayed, under his nose, the only kind of figure
he considered worth looking at--that of a very young girl, supple and
sinuous and quicksilverish; thin, eager shoulders, polished white
arms that were nowhere too fat and nowhere too thin. McKann found it
agreeable to look at Kitty, but when he saw that the authoritative
Mrs. Post, red as a turkey-cock with opinions she was bursting to impart,
was studying and appraising the singer through her lorgnette, he gazed
indifferently out into the house again. He felt for his watch, but his
wife touched him warningly with her elbow--which, he noticed, was not at
all like Kitty's.

When Miss Ayrshire finished her first group of songs, her audience
expressed its approval positively, but guardedly. She smiled bewitchingly
upon the people in front, glanced up at the balconies, and then turned to
the company huddled on the stage behind her. After her gay and careless
bows, she retreated toward the stage door. As she passed McKann, she
again brushed lightly against him, and this time she paused long enough
to glance down at him and murmur, "Pardon!"

In the moment her bright, curious eyes rested upon him, McKann seemed to
see himself as if she were holding a mirror up before him. He beheld
himself a heavy, solid figure, unsuitably clad for the time and place,
with a florid, square face, well-visored with good living and sane
opinions--an inexpressive countenance. Not a rock face, exactly, but a
kind of pressed-brick-and-cement face, a "business" face upon which years
and feelings had made no mark--in which cocktails might eventually blast
out a few hollows. He had never seen himself so distinctly in his
shaving-glass as he did in that instant when Kitty Ayrshire's liquid eye
held him, when her bright, inquiring glance roamed over his person. After
her prehensile train curled over his boot and she was gone, his wife
turned to him and said in the tone of approbation one uses when an infant
manifests its groping intelligence, "Very gracious of her, I'm sure!"
Mrs. Post nodded oracularly. McKann grunted.

Kitty began her second number, a group of romantic German songs which
were altogether more her affair than her first number. When she turned
once to acknowledge the applause behind her, she caught McKann in the act
of yawning behind his hand--he of course wore no gloves--and he thought
she frowned a little. This did not embarrass him; it somehow made him
feel important. When she retired after the second part of the program,
she again looked him over curiously as she passed, and she took marked
precaution that her dress did not touch him. Mrs. Post and his wife again
commented upon her consideration.

The final number was made up of modern French songs which Kitty sang
enchantingly, and at last her frigid public was thoroughly aroused.
While she was coming back again and again to smile and curtsy, McKann
whispered to his wife that if there were to be encores he had better make
a dash for his train.

"Not at all," put in Mrs. Post. "Kitty is going on the same train. She
sings in _Faust_ at the opera tomorrow night, so she'll take no chances."

McKann once more told himself how sorry he felt for Post. At last Miss
Ayrshire returned, escorted by her accompanist, and gave the people what
she of course knew they wanted: the most popular aria from the French
opera of which the title-rôle had become synonymous with her name--an
opera written for her and to her and round about her, by the veteran
French composer who adored her,--the last and not the palest flash of his
creative fire. This brought her audience all the way. They clamoured for
more of it, but she was not to be coerced. She had been unyielding
through storms to which this was a summer breeze. She came on once more,
shrugged her shoulders, blew them a kiss, and was gone. Her last smile
was for that uncomfortable part of her audience seated behind her, and
she looked with recognition at McKann and his ladies as she nodded good
night to the wooden chairs.

McKann hurried his charges into the foyer by the nearest exit and put
them into his motor. Then he went over to the Schenley to have a glass
of beer and a rarebit before train-time. He had not, he admitted to
himself, been so much bored as he pretended. The minx herself was well
enough, but it was absurd in his fellow-townsmen to look owlish and
uplifted about her. He had no rooted dislike for pretty women; he even
didn't deny that gay girls had their place in the world, but they ought
to be kept in their place. He was born a Presbyterian, just as he was
born a McKann. He sat in his pew in the First Church every Sunday, and he
never missed a presbytery meeting when he was in town. His religion was
not very spiritual, certainly, but it was substantial and concrete, made
up of good, hard convictions and opinions. It had something to do with
citizenship, with whom one ought to marry, with the coal business (in
which his own name was powerful), with the Republican party, and with all
majorities and established precedents. He was hostile to fads, to
enthusiasms, to individualism, to all changes except in mining machinery
and in methods of transportation.

His equanimity restored by his lunch at the Schenley, McKann lit a big
cigar, got into his taxi, and bowled off through the sleet.

There was not a sound to be heard or a light to be seen. The ice
glittered on the pavement and on the naked trees. No restless feet were
abroad. At eleven o'clock the rows of small, comfortable houses looked as
empty of the troublesome bubble of life as the Allegheny cemetery itself.
Suddenly the cab stopped, and McKann thrust his head out of the window. A
woman was standing in the middle of the street addressing his driver in
a tone of excitement. Over against the curb a lone electric stood
despondent in the storm. The young woman, her cloak blowing about her,
turned from the driver to McKann himself, speaking rapidly and somewhat
incoherently.

"Could you not be so kind as to help us ? It is Mees Ayrshire, the singer.
The juice is gone out and we cannot move. We must get to the station.
Mademoiselle cannot miss the train; she sings tomorrow night in New York.
It is very important. Could you not take us to the station at East
Liberty ?"

McKann opened the door. "That's all right, but you'll have to hurry. It's
eleven-ten now. You've only got fifteen minutes to make the train. Tell
her to come along."

The maid drew back and looked up at him in amazement. "But, the
hand-luggage to carry, and Mademoiselle to walk! The street is like
glass!"

McKann threw away his cigar and followed her. He stood silent by the door
of the derelict, while the maid explained that she had found help. The
driver had gone off somewhere to telephone for a car. Miss Ayrshire
seemed not at all apprehensive; she had not doubted that a rescuer would
be forthcoming. She moved deliberately; out of a whirl of skirts she
thrust one fur-topped shoe--McKann saw the flash of the gold stocking
above it--and alighted.

"So kind of you! So fortunate for us!" she murmured. One hand she placed
upon his sleeve, and in the other she carried an armful of roses that had
been sent up to the concert stage. The petals showered upon the sooty,
sleety pavement as she picked her way along. They would be lying there
tomorrow morning, and the children in those houses would wonder if there
had been a funeral. The maid followed with two leather bags. As soon as
he had lifted Kitty into his cab she exclaimed:

"My jewel-case! I have forgotten it. It is on the back seat, please. I am
so careless!"

He dashed back, ran his hand along the cushions, and discovered a small
leather bag. When he returned he found the maid and the luggage bestowed
on the front seat, and a place left for him on the back seat beside Kitty
and her flowers.

"Shall we be taking you far out of your way ?" she asked sweetly. "I
haven't an idea where the station is. I'm not even sure about the name.
Céline thinks it is East Liberty, but I think it is West Liberty. An odd
name, anyway. It is a Bohemian quarter, perhaps ? A district where the law
relaxes a trifle ?"

McKann replied grimly that he didn't think the name referred to that kind
of liberty.

"So much the better," sighed Kitty. "I am a Californian; that's the only
part of America I know very well, and out there, when we called a place
Liberty Hill or Liberty Hollow--well, we meant it. You will excuse me if
I'm uncommunicative, won't you ? I must not talk in this raw air. My
throat is sensitive after a long program." She lay back in her corner and
closed her eyes.

When the cab rolled down the incline at East Liberty station, the New
York express was whistling in. A porter opened the door. McKann sprang
out, gave him a claim check and his Pullman ticket, and told him to get
his bag at the check-stand and rush it on that train.

Miss Ayrshire, having gathered up her flowers, put out her hand to take
his arm. "Why, it's you!" she exclaimed, as she saw his face in the
light. "What a coincidence!" She made no further move to alight, but sat
smiling as if she had just seated herself in a drawing-room and were
ready for talk and a cup of tea.

McKann caught her arm. "You must hurry, Miss Ayrshire, if you mean to
catch that train. It stops here only a moment. Can you run ?"

"Can I run!" she laughed. "Try me!"

As they raced through the tunnel and up the inside stairway, McKann
admitted that he had never before made a dash with feet so quick and sure
stepping out beside him. The white-furred boots chased each other like
lambs at play, the gold stockings flashed like the spokes of a bicycle
wheel in the sun. They reached the door of Miss Ayrshire's state-room
just as the train began to pull out. McKann was ashamed of the way he was
panting, for Kitty's breathing was as soft and regular as when she was
reclining on the back seat of his taxi. It had somehow run in his head
that all these stage women were a poor lot physically--unsound, overfed
creatures, like canaries that are kept in a cage and stuffed with
song-restorer. He retreated to escape her thanks. "Good night! Pleasant
journey! Pleasant dreams!" With a friendly nod in Kitty's direction he
closed the door behind him.

He was somewhat surprised to find his own bag, his Pullman ticket in the
strap, on the seat just outside Kitty's door. But there was nothing
strange about it. He had got the last section left on the train, No. 13,
next the drawing-room. Every other berth in the car was made up. He was
just starting to look for the porter when the door of the state-room
opened and Kitty Ayrshire came out. She seated herself carelessly in the
front seat beside his bag.

"Please talk to me a little," she said coaxingly. "I'm always wakeful
after I sing, and I have to hunt some one to talk to. Céline and I get so
tired of each other. We can speak very low, and we shall not disturb any
one." She crossed her feet and rested her elbow on his Gladstone. Though
she still wore her gold slippers and stockings, she did not, he thanked
Heaven, have on her concert gown, but a very demure black velvet with
some sort of pearl trimming about the neck. "Wasn't it funny," she
proceeded, "that it happened to be you who picked me up ? I wanted a
word with you, anyway."

McKann smiled in a way that meant he wasn't being taken in. "Did you ? We
are not very old acquaintances."

"No, perhaps not. But you disapproved tonight, and I thought I was
singing very well. You are very critical in such matters ?"

He had been standing, but now he sat down. "My dear young lady, I am not
critical at all. I know nothing about 'such matters.'"

"And care less ?" she said for him, "Well, then we know where we are, in
so far as that is concerned. What did displease you ? My gown, perhaps ? It
may seem a little _outré_ here, but it's the sort of thing all the
imaginative designers abroad are doing. You like the English sort of
concert gown better ?"

"About gowns," said McKann, "I know even less than about music. If I
looked uncomfortable, it was probably because I was uncomfortable. The
seats were bad and the lights were annoying."

Kitty looked up with solicitude. "I was sorry they sold those seats. I
don't like to make people uncomfortable in any way. Did the lights give
you a headache ? They are very trying. They burn one's eyes out in the
end, I believe." She paused and waved the porter away with a smile as
he came toward them. Half-clad Pittsburghers were tramping up and down
the aisle, casting sidelong glances at McKann and his companion. "How
much better they look with all their clothes on," she murmured. Then,
turning directly to McKann again: "I saw you were not well seated, but I
felt something quite hostile and personal. You were displeased with me.
Doubtless many people are, but I seldom get an opportunity to question
them. It would be nice if you took the trouble to tell me why you were
displeased."

She spoke frankly, pleasantly, without a shadow of challenge or hauteur.
She did not seem to be angling for compliments. McKann settled himself
in his seat. He thought he would try her out. She had come for it, and he
would let her have it. He found, however, that it was harder to formulate
the grounds of his disapproval than he would have supposed. Now that he
sat face to face with her, now that she was leaning against his bag, he
had no wish to hurt her.

"I'm a hard-headed business man," he said evasively, "and I don't much
believe in any of you fluffy-ruffles people. I have a sort of natural
distrust of them all, the men more than the women."

She looked thoughtful. "Artists, you mean ?" drawing her words slowly.
"What is your business ?"

"Coal."

"I don't feel any natural distrust of business men, and I know ever so
many. I don't know any coal-men, but I think I could become very much
interested in coal. Am I larger-minded than you ?"

McKann laughed. "I don't think you know when you are interested or when
you are not. I don't believe you know what it feels like to be really
interested. There is so much fake about your profession. It's an
affectation on both sides. I know a great many of the people who went to
hear you tonight, and I know that most of them neither know nor care
anything about music. They imagine they do, because it's supposed to be
the proper thing."

Kitty sat upright and looked interested. She was certainly a lovely
creature--the only one of her tribe he had ever seen that he would cross
the street to see again. Those were remarkable eyes she had--curious,
penetrating, restless, somewhat impudent, but not at all dulled by
self-conceit.

"But isn't that so in everything ?" she cried. "How many of your clerks
are honest because of a fine, individual sense of honour ? They are
honest because it is the accepted rule of good conduct in business. Do
you know"--she looked at him squarely--"I thought you would have
something quite definite to say to me; but this is funny-paper stuff,
the sort of objection I'd expect from your office-boy."

"Then you don't think it silly for a lot of people to get together and
pretend to enjoy something they know nothing about ?"

"Of course I think it silly, but that's the way God made audiences.
Don't people go to church in exactly the same way ? If there were a
spiritual-pressure test-machine at the door, I suspect not many of you
would get to your pews."

"How do you know I go to church ?"

She shrugged her shoulders. "Oh, people with these old, ready-made
opinions usually go to church. But you can't evade me like that." She
tapped the edge of his seat with the toe of her gold slipper. "You sat
there all evening, glaring at me as if you could eat me alive. Now I give
you a chance to state your objections, and you merely criticize my
audience. What is it ? Is it merely that you happen to dislike my
personality ? In that case, of course, I won't press you."

"No," McKann frowned, "I perhaps dislike your professional personality.
As I told you, I have a natural distrust of your variety."

"Natural, I wonder ?" Kitty murmured. "I don't see why you should
naturally dislike singers any more than I naturally dislike coal-men. I
don't classify people by their occupations. Doubtless I should find some
coal-men repulsive, and you may find some singers so. But I have reason
to believe that, at least, I'm one of the less repellent."

"I don't doubt it," McKann laughed, "and you're a shrewd woman to boot.
But you are, all of you, according to my standards, light people. You're
brilliant, some of you, but you've no depth."

Kitty seemed to assent, with a dive of her girlish head. "Well, it's a
merit in some things to be heavy, and in others to be light. Some things
are meant to go deep, and others to go high. Do you want all the women in
the world to be profound ?"

"You are all," he went on steadily, watching her with indulgence, "fed on
hectic emotions. You are pampered. You don't help to carry the burdens of
the world. You are self-indulgent and appetent."

"Yes, I am," she assented, with a candour which he did not expect. "Not
all artists are, but I am. Why not ? If I could once get a convincing
statement as to why I should not be self-indulgent, I might change my
ways. As for the burdens of the world--" Kitty rested her chin on her
clasped hands and looked thoughtful. "One should give pleasure to others.
My dear sir, granting that the great majority of people can't enjoy
anything very keenly, you'll admit that I give pleasure to many more
people than you do. One should help others who are less fortunate; at
present I am supporting just eight people, besides those I hire. There
was never another family in California that had so many cripples and
hard-luckers as that into which I had the honour to be born. The only
ones who could take care of themselves were ruined by the San Francisco
earthquake some time ago. One should make personal sacrifices. I do; I
give money and time and effort to talented students. Oh, I give something
much more than that! something that you probably have never given to any
one. I give, to the really gifted ones, my _wish,_ my desire, my light,
if I have any; and that, Mr. Worldly Wiseman, is like giving one's blood!
It's the kind of thing you prudent people never give. That is what was
in the box of precious ointment." Kitty threw off her fervour with a
slight gesture, as if it were a scarf, and leaned back, tucking her
slipper up on the edge of his seat. "If you saw the houses I keep up,"
she sighed, "and the people I employ, and the motor-cars I run--And,
after all, I've only this to do it with." She indicated her slender
person, which Marshall could almost have broken in two with his bare
hands.

She was, he thought, very much like any other charming woman, except that
she was more so. Her familiarity was natural and simple. She was at ease
because she was not afraid of him or of herself, or of certain half-clad
acquaintances of his who had been wandering up and down the car oftener
than was necessary. Well, he was not afraid, either.

Kitty put her arms over her head and sighed again, feeling the smooth
part in her black hair. Her head was small--capable of great agitation,
like a bird's; or of great resignation, like a nun's. "I can't see why I
shouldn't be self-indulgent, when I indulge others. I can't understand
your equivocal scheme of ethics. Now I can understand Count Tolstoy's,
perfectly. I had a long talk with him once, about his book 'What is Art ?'
As nearly as I could get it, he believes that we are a race who can exist
only by gratifying appetites; the appetites are evil, and the existence
they carry on is evil. We were always sad, he says, without knowing why;
even in the Stone Age. In some miraculous way a divine ideal was
disclosed to us, directly at variance with our appetites. It gave us a
new craving, which we could only satisfy by starving all the other
hungers in us. Happiness lies in ceasing to be and to cause being,
because the thing revealed to us is dearer than any existence our
appetites can ever get for us. I can understand that. It's something one
often feels in art. It is even the subject of the greatest of all operas,
which, because I can never hope to sing it, I love more than all the
others." Kitty pulled herself up. "Perhaps you agree with Tolstoy ?" she
added languidly.

"No; I think he's a crank," said McKann, cheerfully.

"What do you mean by a crank ?"

"I mean an extremist."

Kitty laughed. "Weighty word! You'll always have a world full of people
who keep to the golden mean. Why bother yourself about me and Tolstoy ?"

"I don't, except when you bother me."

"Poor man! It's true this isn't your fault. Still, you did provoke it by
glaring at me. Why did you go to the concert ?"

"I was dragged."

"I might have known!" she chuckled, and shook her head. "No, you don't
give me any good reasons. Your morality seems to me the compromise of
cowardice, apologetic and sneaking. When righteousness becomes alive and
burning, you hate it as much as you do beauty. You want a little of each
in your life, perhaps--adulterated, sterilized, with the sting taken out.
It's true enough they are both fearsome things when they get loose in the
world; they don't, often."

McKann hated tall talk. "My views on women," he said slowly, "are
simple."

"Doubtless," Kitty responded dryly, "but are they consistent ? Do you
apply them to your stenographers as well as to me ? I take it for
granted you have unmarried stenographers. Their position, economically,
is the same as mine."

McKann studied the toe of her shoe. "With a woman, everything comes back
to one thing." His manner was judicial.

She laughed indulgently. "So we are getting down to brass tacks, eh ? I
have beaten you in argument, and now you are leading trumps."

She put her hands behind her head and her lips parted in a half-yawn.
"Does everything come back to one thing ? I wish I knew! It's more than
likely that, under the same conditions, I should have been very like your
stenographers--if they are good ones. Whatever I was, I would have been a
good one. I think people are very much alike. You are more different than
any one I have met for some time, but I know that there are a great many
more at home like you. And even you--I believe there is a real creature
down under these custom-made prejudices that save you the trouble of
thinking. If you and I were shipwrecked on a desert island, I have no
doubt that we would come to a simple and natural understanding. I'm
neither a coward nor a shirk. You would find, if you had to undertake any
enterprise of danger or difficulty with a woman, that there are several
qualifications quite as important as the one to which you doubtless
refer."

McKann felt nervously for his watch-chain. "Of course," he brought out,
"I am not laying down any generalizations--" His brows wrinkled.

"Oh, aren't you ?" murmured Kitty. "Then I totally misunderstood. But
remember"--holding up a finger--"it is you, not I, who are afraid to
pursue this subject further. Now, I'll tell you something." She leaned
forward and clasped her slim, white hands about her velvet knee. "I am
as much a victim of these ineradicable prejudices as you. Your
stenographer seems to you a better sort. Well, she does to me. Just
because her life is, presumably, greyer than mine, she seems better. My
mind tells me that dulness, and a mediocre order of ability, and poverty,
are not in themselves admirable things. Yet in my heart I always feel
that the sales-women in shops and the working girls in factories are more
meritorious than I. Many of them, with my opportunities, would be more
selfish than I am. Some of them, with their own opportunities, are more
selfish. Yet I make this sentimental genuflection before the nun and the
charwoman. Tell me, haven't you any weakness ? Isn't there any foolish
natural thing that unbends you a trifle and makes you feel gay ?"

"I like to go fishing."

"To see how many fish you can catch ?"

"No, I like the woods and the weather. I like to play a fish and work
hard for him. I like the pussy-willows and the cold; and the sky,
whether it's blue or grey--night coming on, every thing about it."

He spoke devoutly, and Kitty watched him through half-closed eyes. "And
you like to feel that there are light-minded girls like me, who only care
about the inside of shops and theatres and hotels, eh ? You amuse me, you
and your fish! But I mustn't keep you any longer. Haven't I given you
every opportunity to state your case against me ? I thought you would have
more to say for yourself. Do you know, I believe it's not a case you have
at all, but a grudge. I believe you are envious; that you'd like to be a
tenor, and a perfect lady-killer!" She rose, smiling, and paused with her
hand on the door of her stateroom. "Anyhow, thank you for a pleasant
evening. And, by the way, dream of me tonight, and not of either of those
ladies who sat beside you. It does not matter much whom we live with in
this world, but it matters a great deal whom we dream of." She noticed
his bricky flush. "You are very naive, after all, but, oh, so cautious!
You are naturally afraid of everything new, just as I naturally want to
try everything: new people, new religions--new miseries, even. If only
there were more new things--If only you were really new! I might learn
something. I'm like the Queen of Sheba--I'm not above learning. But you,
my friend, would be afraid to try a new shaving soap. It isn't
gravitation that holds the world in place; it's the lazy, obese cowardice
of the people on it. All the same"--taking his hand and smiling
encouragingly--"I'm going to haunt you a little. _Adios!_"

When Kitty entered her state-room, Céline, in her dressing-gown, was
nodding by the window.

"Mademoiselle found the fat gentleman interesting ?" she asked. "It is
nearly one."

"Negatively interesting. His kind always say the same thing. If I could
find one really intelligent man who held his views, I should adopt them."

"Monsieur did not look like an original," murmured Céline, as she began
to take down her lady's hair.

       *       *       *       *       *

McKann slept heavily, as usual, and the porter had to shake him in
the morning. He sat up in his berth, and, after composing his hair with
his fingers, began to hunt about for his clothes. As he put up the
window-blind some bright object in the little hammock over his bed caught
the sunlight and glittered. He stared and picked up a delicately turned
gold slipper.

"Minx! hussy!" he ejaculated. "All that tall talk--! Probably got it from
some man who hangs about; learned it off like a parrot. Did she poke this
in here herself last night, or did she send that sneak-faced Frenchwoman ?
I like her nerve!" He wondered whether he might have been breathing
audibly when the intruder thrust her head between his curtains. He was
conscious that he did not look a Prince Charming in his sleep. He dressed
as fast as he could, and, when he was ready to go to the wash-room,
glared at the slipper. If the porter should start to make up his berth in
his absence--He caught the slipper, wrapped it in his pajama jacket, and
thrust it into his bag. He escaped from the train without seeing his
tormentor again.

Later McKann threw the slipper into the waste-basket in his room at the
Knickerbocker, but the chambermaid, seeing that it was new and mateless,
thought there must be a mistake, and placed it in his clothes-closet. He
found it there when he returned from the theatre that evening.
Considerably mellowed by food and drink and cheerful company, he took the
slipper in his hand and decided to keep it as a reminder that absurd
things could happen to people of the most clocklike deportment. When he
got back to Pittsburgh, he stuck it in a lock-box in his vault, safe from
prying clerks.

       *       *       *       *       *

McKann has been ill for five years now, poor fellow! He still goes to the
office, because it is the only place that interests him, but his partners
do most of the work, and his clerks find him sadly changed--"morbid,"
they call his state of mind. He has had the pine-trees in his yard cut
down because they remind him of cemeteries. On Sundays or holidays, when
the office is empty, and he takes his will or his insurance-policies
out of his lock-box, he often puts the tarnished gold slipper on his
desk and looks at it. Somehow it suggests life to his tired mind, as his
pine-trees suggested death--life and youth. When he drops over some day,
his executors will be puzzled by the slipper.

As for Kitty Ayrshire, she has played so many jokes, practical and
impractical, since then, that she has long ago forgotten the night when
she threw away a slipper to be a thorn in the side of a just man.




Scandal




Kitty Ayrshire had a cold, a persistent inflammation of the vocal cords
which defied the throat specialist. Week after week her name was posted
at the Opera, and week after week it was canceled, and the name of one
of her rivals was substituted. For nearly two months she had been
deprived of everything she liked, even of the people she liked, and had
been shut up until she had come to hate the glass windows between her and
the world, and the wintry stretch of the Park they looked out upon. She
was losing a great deal of money, and, what was worse, she was losing
life; days of which she wanted to make the utmost were slipping by, and
nights which were to have crowned the days, nights of incalculable
possibilities, were being stolen from her by women for whom she had no
great affection. At first she had been courageous, but the strain of
prolonged uncertainty was telling on her, and her nervous condition did
not improve her larynx. Every morning Miles Creedon looked down her
throat, only to put her off with evasions, to pronounce improvement that
apparently never got her anywhere, to say that tomorrow he might be able
to promise something definite.

Her illness, of course, gave rise to rumours--rumours that she had lost
her voice, that at some time last summer she must have lost her
discretion. Kitty herself was frightened by the way in which this cold
hung on. She had had many sharp illnesses in her life, but always,
before this, she had rallied quickly. Was she beginning to lose her
resiliency ? Was she, by any cursed chance, facing a bleak time when she
would have to cherish herself ? She protested, as she wandered about her
sunny, many-windowed rooms on the tenth floor, that if she was going to
have to live frugally, she wouldn't live at all. She wouldn't live on any
terms but the very generous ones she had always known. She wasn't going
to hoard her vitality. It must be there when she wanted it, be ready for
any strain she chose to put upon it, let her play fast and loose with it;
and then, if necessary, she would be ill for a while and pay the piper.
But be systematically prudent and parsimonious she would not.

When she attempted to deliver all this to Doctor Creedon, he merely put
his finger on her lips and said they would discuss these things when she
could talk without injuring her throat. He allowed her to see no one
except the Director of the Opera, who did not shine in conversation and
was not apt to set Kitty going. The Director was a glum fellow, indeed,
but during this calamitous time he had tried to be soothing, and he
agreed with Creedon that she must not risk a premature appearance. Kitty
was tormented by a suspicion that he was secretly backing the little
Spanish woman who had sung many of her parts since she had been ill. He
furthered the girl's interests because his wife had a very special
consideration for her, and Madame had that consideration because--But
that was too long and too dreary a story to follow out in one's mind.
Kitty felt a tonsilitis disgust for opera-house politics, which, when she
was in health, she rather enjoyed, being no mean strategist herself. The
worst of being ill was that it made so many things and people look base.

She was always afraid of being disillusioned. She wished to believe that
everything for sale in Vanity Fair was worth the advertised price. When
she ceased to believe in these delights, she told herself, her pulling
power would decline and she would go to pieces. In some way the chill of
her disillusionment would quiver through the long, black line which
reached from the box-office down to Seventh Avenue on nights when she
sang. They shivered there in the rain and cold, all those people, because
they loved to believe in her inextinguishable zest. She was no prouder of
what she drew in the boxes than she was of that long, oscillating tail;
little fellows in thin coats, Italians, Frenchmen, South-Americans,
Japanese.

When she had been cloistered like a Trappist for six weeks, with nothing
from the outside world but notes and flowers and disquieting morning
papers, Kitty told Miles Creedon that she could not endure complete
isolation any longer.

"I simply cannot live through the evenings. They have become horrors to
me. Every night is the last night of a condemned man. I do nothing but
cry, and that makes my throat worse."

Miles Creedon, handsomest of his profession, was better looking with some
invalids than with others. His athletic figure, his red cheeks, and
splendid teeth always had a cheering effect upon this particular patient,
who hated anything weak or broken.

"What can I do, my dear ? What do you wish ? Shall I come and hold your
lovely hand from eight to ten ? You have only to suggest it."

"Would you do that, even ? No, _caro mio_, I take far too much of your
time as it is. For an age now you have been the only man in the world
to me, and you have been charming! But the world is big, and I am missing
it. Let some one come tonight, some one interesting, but not too
interesting. Pierce Tevis, for instance. He is just back from Paris. Tell
the nurse I may see him for an hour tonight," Kitty finished pleadingly,
and put her fingers on the doctor's sleeve. He looked down at them and
smiled whimsically.

Like other people, he was weak to Kitty Ayrshire. He would do for her
things that he would do for no one else; would break any engagement,
desert a dinner-table, leaving an empty place and an offended hostess, to
sit all evening in Kitty's dressing-room, spraying her throat and calming
her nerves, using every expedient to get her through a performance. He
had studied her voice like a singing master; knew all of its
idiosyncracies and the emotional and nervous perturbations which affected
it. When it was permissible, sometimes when it was not permissible, he
indulged her caprices. On this sunny morning her wan, disconsolate face
moved him.

"Yes, you may see Tevis this evening if you will assure me that you will
not shed one tear for twenty-four hours. I may depend on your word ?" He
rose, and stood before the deep couch on which his patient reclined. Her
arch look seemed to say, "On what could you depend more ?" Creedon smiled,
and shook his head. "If I find you worse tomorrow--"

He crossed to the writing-table and began to separate a bunch of tiny
flame-coloured rosebuds. "May I ?" Selecting one, he sat down on the
chair from which he had lately risen, and leaned forward while Kitty
pinched the thorns from the stem and arranged the flower in his
buttonhole.

"Thank you. I like to wear one of yours. Now I must be off to the
hospital. I've a nasty little operation to do this morning. I'm glad it's
not you. Shall I telephone Tevis about this evening ?"

Kitty hesitated. Her eyes ran rapidly about, seeking a likely pretext.
Creedon laughed.

"Oh, I see. You've already asked him to come. You were so sure of me! Two
hours in bed after lunch, with all the windows open, remember. Read
something diverting, but not exciting; some homely British author;
nothing _abandonné_. And don't make faces at me. Until to-morrow!"

When her charming doctor had disappeared through the doorway, Kitty fell
back on her cushions and closed her eyes. Her mocking-bird, excited by
the sunlight, was singing in his big gilt cage, and a white lilac-tree
that had come that morning was giving out its faint sweetness in the
warm room. But Kitty looked paler and wearier than when the doctor was
with her. Even with him she rose to her part just a little; couldn't help
it. And he took his share of her vivacity and sparkle, like every one
else. He believed that his presence was soothing to her. But he admired;
and whoever admired, blew on the flame, however lightly.

The mocking-bird was in great form this morning. He had the best
bird-voice she had ever heard, and Kitty wished there were some way to
note down his improvisations; but his intervals were not expressible in
any scale she knew. Parker White had brought him to her, from Ojo
Caliente, in New Mexico, where he had been trained in the pine forests by
an old Mexican and an ill-tempered, lame master-bird, half thrush, that
taught young birds to sing. This morning, in his song there were flashes
of silvery Southern springtime; they opened inviting roads of memory. In
half an hour he had sung his disconsolate mistress to sleep.

That evening Kitty sat curled up on the deep couch before the fire,
awaiting Pierce Tevis. Her costume was folds upon folds of diaphanous
white over equally diaphanous rose, with a line of white fur about her
neck. Her beautiful arms were bare. Her tiny Chinese slippers were
embroidered so richly that they resembled the painted porcelain of old
vases. She looked like a sultan's youngest, newest bride; a beautiful
little toy-woman, sitting at one end of the long room which composed
about her,--which, in the soft light, seemed happily arranged for her.
There were flowers everywhere: rose-trees; camellia-bushes, red and
white; the first forced hyacinths of the season; a feathery mimosa-tree,
tall enough to stand under.

The long front of Kitty's study was all windows. At one end was the
fireplace, before which she sat. At the other end, back in a lighted
alcove, hung a big, warm, sympathetic interior by Lucien Simon,--a group
of Kitty's friends having tea in the painter's salon in Paris. The room
in the picture was flooded with early lamp-light, and one could feel the
grey, chill winter twilight in the Paris streets outside. There stood the
cavalier-like old composer, who had done much for Kitty, in his most
characteristic attitude, before the hearth. Mme. Simon sat at the
tea-table. B----, the historian, and H----, the philologist, stood in
animated discussion behind the piano, while Mme. H---- was tying on the
bonnet of her lovely little daughter. Marcel Durand, the physicist, sat
alone in a corner, his startling black-and-white profile lowered
broodingly, his cold hands locked over his sharp knee. A genial,
red-bearded sculptor stood over him, about to touch him on the shoulder
and waken him from his dream.

This painting made, as it were, another room; so that Kitty's study on
Central Park West seemed to open into that charming French interior, into
one of the most highly harmonized and richly associated rooms in Paris.
There her friends sat or stood about, men distinguished, women at once
plain and beautiful, with their furs and bonnets, their clothes that were
so distinctly not smart--all held together by the warm lamp-light, by an
indescribable atmosphere of graceful and gracious human living.

Pierce Tevis, after he had entered noiselessly and greeted Kitty, stood
before her fire and looked over her shoulder at this picture.

"It's nice that you have them there together, now that they are
scattered, God knows where, fighting to preserve just that. But your own
room, too, is charming," he added at last, taking his eyes from the
canvas.

Kitty shrugged her shoulders.

"Bah! I can help to feed the lamp, but I can't supply the dear things it
shines upon."

"Well, tonight it shines upon you and me, and we aren't so bad." Tevis
stepped forward and took her hand affectionately. "You've been over a
rough bit of road. I'm so sorry. It's left you looking very lovely,
though. Has it been very hard to get on ?"

She brushed his hand gratefully against her cheek and nodded.

"Awfully dismal. Everything has been shut out from me but--gossip. That
always gets in. Often I don't mind, but this time I have. People do tell
such lies about me."

"Of course we do. That's part of our fun, one of the many pleasures you
give us. It only shows how hard up we are for interesting public
personages; for a royal family, for romantic fiction, if you will. But I
never hear any stories that wound me, and I'm very sensitive about you."

"I'm gossiped about rather more than the others, am I not ?"

"I believe! Heaven send that the day when you are not gossiped about is
far distant! Do you want to bite off your nose to spite your pretty face ?
You are the sort of person who makes myths. You can't turn around without
making one. That's your singular good luck. A whole staff of publicity
men, working day and night, couldn't do for you what you do for yourself.
There is an affinity between you and the popular imagination."

"I suppose so," said Kitty, and sighed. "All the same, I'm getting almost
as tired of the person I'm supposed to be as of the person I really am. I
wish you would invent a new Kitty Ayrshire for me, Pierce. Can't I do
something revolutionary ? Marry, for instance ?"

Tevis rose in alarm.

"Whatever you do, don't try to change your legend. You have now the one
that gives the greatest satisfaction to the greatest number of people.
Don't disappoint your public. The popular imagination, to which you make
such a direct appeal, for some reason wished you to have a son, so it has
given you one. I've heard a dozen versions of the story, but it is always
a son, never by any chance a daughter. Your public gives you what is best
for you. Let well enough alone."

Kitty yawned and dropped back on her cushions.

"He still persists, does he, in spite of never being visible ?"

"Oh, but he has been seen by ever so many people. Let me think a moment."
He sank into an attitude of meditative ease. "The best description I ever
had of him was from a friend of my mother, an elderly woman, thoroughly
truthful and matter-of-fact. She has seen him often. He is kept in
Russia, in St. Petersburg, that was. He is about eight years old and of
marvellous beauty. He is always that in every version. My old friend has
seen him being driven in his sledge on the Nevskii Prospekt on winter
afternoons; black horses with silver bells and a giant in uniform on the
seat beside the driver. He is always attended by this giant, who is
responsible to the Grand Duke Paul for the boy. This lady can produce no
evidence beyond his beauty and his splendid furs and the fact that all
the Americans in Petrograd know he is your son."

Kitty laughed mournfully.

"If the Grand Duke Paul had a son, any old rag of a son, the province of
Moscow couldn't contain him! He may, for aught I know, actually pretend
to have a son. It would be very like him." She looked at her finger-tips
and her rings disapprovingly for a moment. "Do you know, I've been
thinking that I would rather like to lay hands on that youngster. I
believe he'd be interesting. I'm bored with the world."

Tevis looked up and said quickly:

"Would you like him, really ?"

"Of course I should," she said indignantly. "But, then, I like other
things, too; and one has to choose. When one has only two or three things
to choose from, life is hard; when one has many, it is harder still. No,
on the whole, I don't mind that story. It's rather pretty, except for the
Grand Duke. But not all of them are pretty."

"Well, none of them are very ugly; at least I never heard but one that
troubled me, and that was long ago."

She looked interested.

"That is what I want to know; how do the ugly ones get started ? How did
that one get going and what was it about ? Is it too dreadful to repeat ?"

"No, it's not especially dreadful; merely rather shabby. If you really
wish to know, and won't be vexed, I can tell you exactly how it got
going, for I took the trouble to find out. But it's a long story, and you
really had nothing whatever to do with it."

"Then who did have to do with it ? Tell me; I should like to know exactly
how even one of them originated."

"Will you be comfortable and quiet and not get into a rage, and let me
look at you as much as I please ?"

Kitty nodded, and Tevis sat watching her indolently while he debated how
much of his story he ought not to tell her. Kitty liked being looked at
by intelligent persons. She knew exactly how good looking she was; and
she knew, too, that, pretty as she was, some of those rather sallow
women in the Simon painting had a kind of beauty which she would never
have. This knowledge, Tevis was thinking, this important realization,
contributed more to her loveliness than any other thing about her; more
than her smooth, ivory skin or her changing grey eyes, the delicate
forehead above them, or even the dazzling smile, which was gradually
becoming too bright and too intentional,--out in the world, at least.
Here by her own fire she still had for her friends a smile less electric
than the one she flashed from stages. She could still be, in short,
_intime_, a quality which few artists keep, which few ever had.

Kitty broke in on her friend's meditations.

"You may smoke. I had rather you did. I hate to deprive people of things
they like."

"No, thanks. May I have those chocolates on the tea-table ? They are quite
as bad for me. May you ? No, I suppose not." He settled himself by the
fire, with the candy beside him, and began in the agreeable voice which
always soothed his listener.

"As I said, it was a long while ago, when you first came back to this
country and were singing at the Manhattan. I dropped in at the
Metropolitan one evening to hear something new they were trying out. It
was an off night, no pullers in the cast, and nobody in the boxes but
governesses and poor relations. At the end of the first act two people
entered one of the boxes in the second tier. The man was Siegmund Stein,
the department-store millionaire, and the girl, so the men about me in
the omnibus box began to whisper, was Kitty Ayrshire. I didn't know you
then, but I was unwilling to believe that you were with Stein. I could
not contradict them at that time, however, for the resemblance, if it was
merely a resemblance, was absolute, and all the world knew that you were
not singing at the Manhattan that night. The girl's hair was dressed just
as you then wore yours. Moreover, her head was small and restless like
yours, and she had your colouring, your eyes, your chin. She carried
herself with the critical indifference one might expect in an artist who
had come for a look at a new production that was clearly doomed to
failure. She applauded lightly. She made comments to Stein when comments
were natural enough. I thought, as I studied her face with the glass,
that her nose was a trifle thinner than yours, a prettier nose, my dear
Kitty, but stupider and more inflexible. All the same, I was troubled
until I saw her laugh,--and then I knew she was a counterfeit. I had
never seen you laugh, but I knew that you would not laugh like that. It
was not boisterous; indeed, it was consciously refined,--mirthless,
meaningless. In short, it was not the laugh of one whom our friends in
there"--pointing to the Simon painting--"would honour with their
affection and admiration."

Kitty rose on her elbow and burst out indignantly:

"So you would really have been hood-winked except for that! You may be
sure that no woman, no intelligent woman, would have been. Why do we ever
take the trouble to look like anything for any of you ? I could count on
my four fingers"--she held them up and shook them at him--"the men I've
known who had the least perception of what any woman really looked like,
and they were all dressmakers. Even painters"--glancing back in the
direction of the Simon picture--"never get more than one type through
their thick heads; they try to make all women look like some wife or
mistress. You are all the same; you never see our real faces. What you do
see, is some cheap conception of prettiness you got from a coloured
supplement when you were adolescents. It's too discouraging. I'd rather
take vows and veil my face for ever from such abominable eyes. In the
kingdom of the blind any petticoat is a queen." Kitty thumped the cushion
with her elbow. "Well, I can't do anything about it. Go on with your
story."

"Aren't you furious, Kitty! And I thought I was so shrewd. I've quite
forgotten where I was. Anyhow, I was not the only man fooled. After the
last curtain I met Villard, the press man of that management, in the
lobby, and asked him whether Kitty Ayrshire was in the house. He said he
thought so. Stein had telephoned for a box, and said he was bringing one
of the artists from the other company. Villard had been too busy about
the new production to go to the box, but he was quite sure the woman was
Ayrshire, whom he had met in Paris.

"Not long after that I met Dan Leland, a classmate of mine, at the
Harvard Club. He's a journalist, and he used to keep such eccentric hours
that I had not run across him for a long time. We got to talking about
modern French music, and discovered that we both had a very lively
interest in Kitty Ayrshire.

"'Could you tell me,' Dan asked abruptly, 'why, with pretty much all the
known world to choose her friends from, this young woman should flit
about with Siegmund Stein ? It prejudices people against her. He's a most
objectionable person.'

"'Have you,' I asked, 'seen her with him, yourself ?'

"Yes, he had seen her driving with Stein, and some of the men on his
paper had seen her dining with him at rather queer places down town.
Stein was always hanging about the Manhattan on nights when Kitty sang. I
told Dan that I suspected a masquerade. That interested him, and
he said he thought he would look into the matter. In short, we both
agreed to look into it. Finally, we got the story, though Dan could never
use it, could never even hint at it, because Stein carries heavy
advertising in his paper.

"To make you see the point, I must give you a little history of Siegmund
Stein. Any one who has seen him never forgets him. He is one of the most
hideous men in New York, but it's not at all the common sort of ugliness
that comes from over-eating and automobiles. He isn't one of the fat
horrors. He has one of those rigid, horselike faces that never tell
anything; a long nose, flattened as if it had been tied down; a scornful
chin; long, white teeth; flat cheeks, yellow as a Mongolian's; tiny,
black eyes, with puffy lids and no lashes; dingy, dead-looking
hair--looks as if it were glued on.

"Stein came here a beggar from somewhere in Austria. He began by working
on the machines in old Rosenthal's garment factory. He became a speeder,
a foreman, a salesman; worked his way ahead steadily until the hour when
he rented an old dwelling-house on Seventh Avenue and began to make
misses' and juniors' coats. I believe he was the first manufacturer to
specialize in those particular articles. Dozens of garment manufacturers
have come along the same road, but Stein is like none of the rest of
them. He is, and always was, a personality. While he was still at the
machine, a hideous, underfed little whippersnapper, he was already a
youth of many-coloured ambitions, deeply concerned about his dress, his
associates, his recreations. He haunted the old Astor Library and the
Metropolitan Museum, learned something about pictures and porcelains,
took singing lessons, though he had a voice like a crow's. When he sat
down to his baked apple and doughnut in a basement lunch-room, he would
prop a book up before him and address his food with as much leisure and
ceremony as if he were dining at his club. He held himself at a distance
from his fellow-workmen and somehow always managed to impress them with
his superiority. He had inordinate vanity, and there are many stories
about his foppishness. After his first promotion in Rosenthal's factory,
he bought a new overcoat. A few days later, one of the men at the
machines, which Stein had just quitted, appeared in a coat exactly like
it. Stein could not discharge him, but he gave his own coat to a newly
arrived Russian boy and got another. He was already magnificent.

"After he began to make headway with misses' and juniors' cloaks, he
became a collector--etchings, china, old musical instruments. He had a
dancing master, and engaged a beautiful Brazilian widow--she was said to
be a secret agent for some South American republic--to teach him
Spanish. He cultivated the society of the unknown great: poets, actors,
musicians. He entertained them sumptuously, and they regarded him
as a deep, mysterious Jew who had the secret of gold, which they had not.
His business associates thought him a man of taste and culture, a patron
of the arts, a credit to the garment trade.

"One of Stein's many ambitions was to be thought a success with women. He
got considerable notoriety in the garment world by his attentions to an
emotional actress who is now quite forgotten, but who had her little hour
of expectation. Then there was a dancer; then, just after Gorky's visit
here, a Russian anarchist woman. After that the coat-makers and
shirtwaist-makers began to whisper that Stein's great success was
with Kitty Ayrshire.

"It is the hardest thing in the world to disprove such a story, as Dan
Leland and I discovered. We managed to worry down the girl's address
through a taxi-cab driver who got next to Stein's chauffeur. She had an
apartment in a decent-enough house on Waverly Place. Nobody ever came to
see her but Stein, her sisters, and a little Italian girl from whom we
got the story.

"The counterfeit's name was Ruby Mohr. She worked in a shirtwaist
factory, and this Italian girl, Margarita, was her chum. Stein came to
the factory when he was hunting for living models for his new department
store. He looked the girls over, and picked Ruby out from several
hundred. He had her call at his office after business hours, tried her
out in cloaks and evening gowns, and offered her a position. She never,
however, appeared as a model in the Sixth Avenue store. Her likeness to
the newly arrived prima donna suggested to Stein another act in the play
he was always putting on. He gave two of her sisters positions as
saleswomen, but Ruby he established in an apartment on Waverly Place.

"To the outside world Stein became more mysterious in his behaviour
than ever. He dropped his Bohemian friends. No more suppers and
theatre-parties. Whenever Kitty sang, he was in his box at the Manhattan,
usually alone, but not always. Sometimes he took two or three good
customers, large buyers from St. Louis or Kansas City. His coat factory
is still the biggest earner of his properties. I've seen him there with
these buyers, and they carried themselves as if they were being let in on
something; took possession of the box with a proprietory air, smiled and
applauded and looked wise as if each and every one of them were friends
of Kitty Ayrshire. While they buzzed and trained their field-glasses
on the prima donna, Stein was impassive and silent. I don't imagine he
even told many lies. He is the most insinuating cuss, anyhow. He probably
dropped his voice or lifted his eyebrows when he invited them, and let
their own eager imaginations do the rest. But what tales they took back
to their provincial capitals!

"Sometimes, before they left New York, they were lucky enough to see
Kitty dining with their clever garment man at some restaurant, her back
to the curious crowd, her face half concealed by a veil or a fur collar.
Those people are like children; nothing that is true or probable
interests them. They want the old, gaudy lies, told always in the same
way. Siegmund Stein and Kitty Ayrshire--a story like that, once launched,
is repeated unchallenged for years among New York factory sports. In St.
Paul, St. Jo, Sioux City, Council Bluffs, there used to be clothing
stores where a photograph of Kitty Ayrshire hung in the fitting-room or
over the proprietor's desk.

"This girl impersonated you successfully to the lower manufacturing world
of New York for two seasons. I doubt if it could have been put across
anywhere else in the world except in this city, which pays you so
magnificently and believes of you what it likes. Then you went over to
the Metropolitan, stopped living in hotels, took this apartment, and
began to know people. Stein discontinued his pantomime at the right
moment, withdrew his patronage. Ruby, of course, did not go back to
shirtwaists. A business friend of Stein's took her over, and she dropped
out of sight. Last winter, one cold, snowy night, I saw her once again.
She was going into a saloon hotel with a tough-looking young fellow. She
had been drinking, she was shabby, and her blue shoes left stains in the
slush. But she still looked amazingly, convincingly like a battered,
hardened Kitty Ayrshire. As I saw her going up the brass-edged stairs, I
said to myself--"

"Never mind that." Kitty rose quickly, took an impatient step to the
hearth, and thrust one shining porcelain slipper out to the fire. "The
girl doesn't interest me. There is nothing I can do about her, and of
course she never looked like me at all. But what did Stein do without
me ?"

"Stein ? Oh, he chose a new rôle. He married with great
magnificence--married a Miss Mandelbaum, a California heiress. Her
people have a line of department stores along the Pacific Coast. The
Steins now inhabit a great house on Fifth Avenue that used to belong to
people of a very different sort. To old New-Yorkers, it's an historic
house."

Kitty laughed, and sat down on the end of her couch nearest her guest;
sat upright, without cushions.

"I imagine I know more about that house than you do. Let me tell you how
I made the sequel to your story.

"It has to do with Peppo Amoretti. You may remember that I brought Peppo
to this country, and brought him in, too, the year the war broke out,
when it wasn't easy to get boys who hadn't done military service out of
Italy. I had taken him to Munich to have some singing lessons. After the
war came on we had to get from Munich to Naples in order to sail at all.
We were told that we could take only hand luggage on the railways, but I
took nine trunks and Peppo. I dressed Peppo in knickerbockers, made him
brush his curls down over his ears like doughnuts, and carry a little
violin-case. It took us eleven days to reach Naples. I got my trunks
through purely by personal persuasion. Once at Naples, I had a frightful
time getting Peppo on the boat. I declared him as hand-luggage; he was so
travel-worn and so crushed by his absurd appearance that he did not look
like much else. One inspector had a sense of humour, and passed him at
that, but the other was inflexible. I had to be very dramatic. Peppo was
frightened, and there is no fight in him, anyhow.

"_'Per me tutto e indifferente, Signorina,'_ he kept whimpering. 'Why
should I go without it ? I have lost it.'

"'Which ?' I screamed. '_Not_ the hat-trunk ?'

"'_No, no; mia voce._ It is gone since Ravenna.'

"He thought he had lost his voice somewhere along the way. At last I told
the inspector that I couldn't live without Peppo, and that I would throw
myself into the bay. I took him into my confidence. Of course, when I
found I had to play on that string, I wished I hadn't made the
boy such a spectacle. But ridiculous as he was, I managed to make the
inspector believe that I had kidnapped him, and that he was indispensable
to my happiness. I found that incorruptible official, like most people,
willing to aid one so utterly depraved. I could never have got that boy
out for any proper, reasonable purpose, such as giving him a job or
sending him to school. Well, it's a queer world! But I must cut all that
and get to the Steins.

"That first winter Peppo had no chance at the Opera. There was an iron
ring about him, and my interest in him only made it all the more
difficult. We've become a nest of intrigues down there; worse than the
Scala. Peppo had to scratch along just any way. One evening he came to me
and said he could get an engagement to sing for the grand rich Steins,
but the condition was that I should sing with him. They would pay, oh,
anything! And the fact that I had sung a private engagement with him
would give him other engagements of the same sort. As you know, I
never sing private engagements; but to help the boy along, I consented.

"On the night of the party, Peppo and I went to the house together in a
taxi. My car was ailing. At the hour when the music was about to begin,
the host and hostess appeared at my dressing-room, up-stairs. Isn't he
wonderful ? Your description was most inadequate. I never encountered
such restrained, frozen, sculptured vanity. My hostess struck me as
extremely good natured and jolly, though somewhat intimate in her manner.
Her reassuring pats and smiles puzzled me at the time, I remember, when I
didn't know that she had anything in particular to be large-minded and
charitable about. Her husband made known his willingness to conduct me
to the music-room, and we ceremoniously descended a staircase blooming
like the hanging-gardens of Babylon. From there I had my first glimpse
of the company. They _were_ strange people. The women glittered like
Christmas-trees. When we were half-way down the stairs, the buzz of
conversation stopped so suddenly that some foolish remark I happened to
be making rang out like oratory. Every face was lifted toward us. My
host and I completed our descent and went the length of the drawing-room
through a silence which somewhat awed me. I couldn't help wishing that
one could ever get that kind of attention in a concert-hall. In the
music-room Stein insisted upon arranging things for me. I must say that
he was neither awkward nor stupid, not so wooden as most rich men who
rent singers. I was properly affable. One has, under such circumstances,
to be either gracious or pouty. Either you have to stand and sulk, like
an old-fashioned German singer who wants the piano moved about for her
like a tea-wagon, and the lights turned up and the lights turned
down,--or you have to be a trifle forced, like a débutante trying to make
good. The fixed attention of my audience affected me. I was aware of
unusual interest, of a thoroughly enlisted public. When, however, my host
at last left me, I felt the tension relax to such an extent that I
wondered whether by any chance he, and not I, was the object of so much
curiosity. But, at any rate, their cordiality pleased me so well that
after Peppo and I had finished our numbers I sang an encore or two, and
I stayed through Peppo's performance because I felt that they liked to
look at me.

"I had asked not to be presented to people, but Mrs. Stein, of course,
brought up a few friends. The throng began closing in upon me, glowing
faces bore down from every direction, and I realized that, among people
of such unscrupulous cordiality, I must look out for myself. I ran
through the drawing-room and fled up the stairway, which was thronged
with Old Testament characters. As I passed them, they all looked at me
with delighted, cherishing eyes, as if I had at last come back to my
native hamlet. At the top of the stairway a young man, who looked like a
camel with its hair parted on the side, stopped me, seized my hands and
said he must present himself, as he was such an old friend of Siegmund's
bachelor days. I said, 'Yes, how interesting!' The atmosphere was somehow
so thick and personal that I felt uncomfortable.

"When I reached my dressing-room Mrs. Stein followed me to say that I
would, of course, come down to supper, as a special table had been
prepared for me. I replied that it was not my custom.

"'But here it is different. With us you must feel perfect freedom.
Siegmund will never forgive me if you do not stay. After supper our car
will take you home.' She was overpowering. She had the manner of an
intimate and indulgent friend of long standing. She seemed to have come
to make me a visit. I could only get rid of her by telling her that I
must see Peppo at once, if she would be good enough to send him to me.
She did not come back, and I began to fear that I would actually be
dragged down to supper. It was as if I had been kidnapped. I felt like
_Gulliver_ among the giants. These people were all too--well, too much
what they were. No chill of manner could hold them off. I was
defenseless. I must get away. I ran to the top of the staircase and
looked down. There was that fool Peppo, beleaguered by a bevy of fair
women. They were simply looting him, and he was grinning like an idiot. I
gathered up my train, ran down, and made a dash at him, yanked him out of
that circle of rich contours, and dragged him by a limp cuff up the
stairs after me. I told him that I must escape from that house at once.
If he could get to the telephone, well and good; but if he couldn't get
past so many deep-breathing ladies, then he must break out of the front
door and hunt me a cab on foot. I felt as if I were about to be immured
within a harem.

"He had scarcely dashed off when the host called my name several times
outside the door. Then he knocked and walked in, uninvited. I told him
that I would be inflexible about supper. He must make my excuses to his
charming friends; any pretext he chose. He did not insist. He took up his
stand by the fireplace and began to talk; said rather intelligent things.
I did not drive him out; it was his own house, and he made himself
agreeable. After a time a deputation of his friends came down the hall,
somewhat boisterously, to say that supper could not be served until we
came down. Stein was still standing by the mantel, I remember. He
scattered them, without moving or speaking to them, by a portentous
look. There is something hideously forceful about him. He took a very
profound leave of me, and said he would order his car at once. In a
moment Peppo arrived, splashed to the ankles, and we made our escape
together.

"A week later Peppo came to me in a rage, with a paper called _The
American Gentleman_, and showed me a page devoted to three photographs:
Mr. and Mrs. Siegmund Stein, lately married in New York City, and Kitty
Ayrshire, operatic soprano, who sang at their house-warming. Mrs. Stein
and I were grinning our best, looked frantic with delight, and Siegmund
frowned inscrutably between us. Poor Peppo wasn't mentioned. Stein has a
publicity sense."

Tevis rose.

"And you have enormous publicity value and no discretion. It was just
like you to fall for such a plot, Kitty. You'd be sure to."

"What's the use of discretion ?" She murmured behind her hand. "If the
Steins want to adopt you into their family circle, they'll get you in the
end. That's why I don't feel compassionate about your Ruby. She and I are
in the same boat. We are both the victims of circumstance, and in New
York so many of the circumstances are Steins."




Paul's Case




It was Paul's afternoon to appear before the faculty of the Pittsburgh
High School to account for his various misdemeanours. He had been
suspended a week ago, and his father had called at the Principal's office
and confessed his perplexity about his son. Paul entered the faculty room
suave and smiling. His clothes were a trifle out-grown, and the tan
velvet on the collar of his open overcoat was frayed and worn; but for
all that there was something of the dandy about him, and he wore an opal
pin in his neatly knotted black four-in-hand, and a red carnation in his
button-hole. This latter adornment the faculty somehow felt was not
properly significant of the contrite spirit befitting a boy under the ban
of suspension.

Paul was tall for his age and very thin, with high, cramped shoulders and
a narrow chest. His eyes were remarkable for a certain hysterical
brilliancy, and he continually used them in a conscious, theatrical sort
of way, peculiarly offensive in a boy. The pupils were abnormally large,
as though he were addicted to belladonna, but there was a glassy glitter
about them which that drug does not produce.

When questioned by the Principal as to why he was there, Paul stated,
politely enough, that he wanted to come back to school. This was a lie,
but Paul was quite accustomed to lying; found it, indeed, indispensable
for overcoming friction. His teachers were asked to state their
respective charges against him, which they did with such a rancour and
aggrievedness as evinced that this was not a usual case. Disorder and
impertinence were among the offences named, yet each of his instructors
felt that it was scarcely possible to put into words the real cause of
the trouble, which lay in a sort of hysterically defiant manner of the
boy's; in the contempt which they all knew he felt for them, and which he
seemingly made not the least effort to conceal. Once, when he had been
making a synopsis of a paragraph at the blackboard, his English teacher
had stepped to his side and attempted to guide his hand. Paul had started
back with a shudder and thrust his hands violently behind him. The
astonished woman could scarcely have been more hurt and embarrassed had
he struck at her. The insult was so involuntary and definitely personal
as to be unforgettable. In one way and another, he had made all his
teachers, men and women alike, conscious of the same feeling of physical
aversion. In one class he habitually sat with his hand shading his eyes;
in another he always looked out of the window during the recitation; in
another he made a running commentary on the lecture, with humorous
intent.

His teachers felt this afternoon that his whole attitude was symbolized
by his shrug and his flippantly red carnation flower, and they fell upon
him without mercy, his English teacher leading the pack. He stood through
it smiling, his pale lips parted over his white teeth. (His lips were
continually twitching, and he had a habit of raising his eyebrows that
was contemptuous and irritating to the last degree.) Older boys than
Paul had broken down and shed tears under that ordeal, but his set smile
did not once desert him, and his only sign of discomfort was the nervous
trembling of the fingers that toyed with the buttons of his overcoat, and
an occasional jerking of the other hand which held his hat. Paul was
always smiling, always glancing about him, seeming to feel that people
might be watching him and trying to detect something. This conscious
expression, since it was as far as possible from boyish mirthfulness, was
usually attributed to insolence or "smartness."

As the inquisition proceeded, one of his instructors repeated an
impertinent remark of the boy's, and the Principal asked him whether he
thought that a courteous speech to make to a woman. Paul shrugged his
shoulders slightly and his eyebrows twitched.

"I don't know," he replied. "I didn't mean to be polite or impolite,
either. I guess it's a sort of way I have, of saying things regardless."

The Principal asked him whether he didn't think that a way it would be
well to get rid of. Paul grinned and said he guessed so. When he was told
that he could go, he bowed gracefully and went out. His bow was like a
repetition of the scandalous red carnation.

His teachers were in despair, and his drawing master voiced the feeling
of them all when he declared there was something about the boy which
none of them understood. He added: "I don't really believe that smile of
his comes altogether from insolence; there's something sort of haunted
about it. The boy is not strong, for one thing. There is something wrong
about the fellow."

The drawing master had come to realize that, in looking at Paul, one saw
only his white teeth and the forced animation of his eyes. One warm
afternoon the boy had gone to sleep at his drawing-board, and his master
had noted with amazement what a white, blue-veined face it was; drawn and
wrinkled like an old man's about the eyes, the lips twitching even in his
sleep.

His teachers left the building dissatisfied and unhappy; humiliated to
have felt so vindictive toward a mere boy, to have uttered this feeling
in cutting terms, and to have set each other on, as it were, in the
grewsome game of intemperate reproach. One of them remembered having seen
a miserable street cat set at bay by a ring of tormentors.

As for Paul, he ran down the hill whistling the Soldiers' Chorus from
_Faust_, looking wildly behind him now and then to see whether some of
his teachers were not there to witness his lightheartedness. As it was
now late in the afternoon and Paul was on duty that evening as usher at
Carnegie Hall, he decided that he would not go home to supper.

When he reached the concert hall the doors were not yet open. It was
chilly outside, and he decided to go up into the picture gallery--always
deserted at this hour--where there were some of Raffelli's gay studies of
Paris streets and an airy blue Venetian scene or two that always
exhilarated him. He was delighted to find no one in the gallery but the
old guard, who sat in the corner, a newspaper on his knee, a black patch
over one eye and the other closed. Paul possessed himself of the place
and walked confidently up and down, whistling under his breath. After a
while he sat down before a blue Rico and lost himself. When he bethought
him to look at his watch, it was after seven o'clock, and he rose with a
start and ran downstairs, making a face at Augustus Caesar, peering out
from the cast-room, and an evil gesture at the Venus of Milo as he passed
her on the stairway.

When Paul reached the ushers' dressing-room half-a-dozen boys were there
already, and he began excitedly to tumble into his uniform. It was one of
the few that at all approached fitting, and Paul thought it very
becoming--though he knew the tight, straight coat accentuated his narrow
chest, about which he was exceedingly sensitive. He was always excited
while he dressed, twanging all over to the tuning of the strings and the
preliminary flourishes of the horns in the music-room; but tonight he
seemed quite beside himself, and he teased and plagued the boys until,
telling him that he was crazy, they put him down on the floor and sat on
him.

Somewhat calmed by his suppression, Paul dashed out to the front of the
house to seat the early comers. He was a model usher. Gracious and
smiling he ran up and down the aisles. Nothing was too much trouble for
him; he carried messages and brought programs as though it were his
greatest pleasure in life, and all the people in his section thought him
a charming boy, feeling that he remembered and admired them. As the house
filled, he grew more and more vivacious and animated, and the colour came
to his cheeks and lips. It was very much as though this were a great
reception and Paul were the host. Just as the musicians came out to take
their places, his English teacher arrived with checks for the seats which
a prominent manufacturer had taken for the season. She betrayed some
embarrassment when she handed Paul the tickets, and a _hauteur_ which
subsequently made her feel very foolish. Paul was startled for a moment,
and had the feeling of wanting to put her out; what business had she here
among all these fine people and gay colours ? He looked her over and
decided that she was not appropriately dressed and must be a fool to sit
downstairs in such togs. The tickets had probably been sent her out of
kindness, he reflected, as he put down a seat for her, and she had about
as much right to sit there as he had.

When the symphony began Paul sank into one of the rear seats with a long
sigh of relief, and lost himself as he had done before the Rico. It was
not that symphonies, as such, meant anything in particular to Paul, but
the first sigh of the instruments seemed to free some hilarious spirit
within him; something that struggled there like the Genius in the bottle
found by the Arab fisherman. He felt a sudden zest of life; the lights
danced before his eyes and the concert hall blazed into unimaginable
splendour. When the soprano soloist came on, Paul forgot even the
nastiness of his teacher's being there, and gave himself up to the
peculiar intoxication such personages always had for him. The soloist
chanced to be a German woman, by no means in her first youth, and the
mother of many children; but she wore a satin gown and a tiara, and she
had that indefinable air of achievement, that world-shine upon her, which
always blinded Paul to any possible defects.

After a concert was over, Paul was often irritable and wretched until he
got to sleep,--and tonight he was even more than usually restless. He had
the feeling of not being able to let down; of its being impossible to
give up this delicious excitement which was the only thing that could
be called living at all. During the last number he withdrew and, after
hastily changing his clothes in the dressing-room, slipped out to the
side door where the singer's carriage stood. Here he began pacing rapidly
up and down the walk, waiting to see her come out.

Over yonder the Schenley, in its vacant stretch, loomed big and square
through the fine rain, the windows of its twelve stories glowing like
those of a lighted card-board house under a Christmas tree. All the
actors and singers of any importance stayed there when they were in the
city, and a number of the big manufacturers of the place lived there in
the winter. Paul had often hung about the hotel, watching the people go
in and out, longing to enter and leave school-masters and dull care
behind him for ever.

At last the singer came out, accompanied by the conductor, who helped
her into her carriage and closed the door with a cordial _auf
wiedersehen_,--which set Paul to wondering whether she were
not an old sweetheart of his. Paul followed the carriage over to the
hotel, walking so rapidly as not to be far from the entrance when the
singer alighted and disappeared behind the swinging glass doors which
were opened by a negro in a tall hat and a long coat. In the moment that
the door was ajar, it seemed to Paul that he, too, entered. He seemed to
feel himself go after her up the steps, into the warm, lighted building,
into an exotic, a tropical world of shiny, glistening surfaces and
basking ease. He reflected upon the mysterious dishes that were brought
into the dining-room, the green bottles in buckets of ice, as he had seen
them in the supper party pictures of the Sunday supplement. A quick gust
of wind brought the rain down with sudden vehemence, and Paul was
startled to find that he was still outside in the slush of the gravel
driveway; that his boots were letting in the water and his scanty
overcoat was clinging wet about him; that the lights in front of the
concert hall were out, and that the rain was driving in sheets between
him and the orange glow of the windows above him. There it was, what he
wanted--tangibly before him, like the fairy world of a Christmas
pantomime; as the rain beat in his face, Paul wondered whether he were
destined always to shiver in the black night outside, looking up at it.

He turned and walked reluctantly toward the car tracks. The end had to
come sometime; his father in his night-clothes at the top of the stairs,
explanations that did not explain, hastily improvised fictions that were
forever tripping him up, his upstairs room and its horrible yellow
wallpaper, the creaking bureau with the greasy plush collar-box, and over
his painted wooden bed the pictures of George Washington and John Calvin,
and the framed motto, "Feed my Lambs," which had been worked in red
worsted by his mother, whom Paul could not remember.

Half an hour later, Paul alighted from the Negley Avenue car and went
slowly down one of the side streets off the main thoroughfare. It was a
highly respectable street, where all the houses were exactly alike, and
where business men of moderate means begot and reared large families
of children, all of whom went to Sabbath-school and learned the shorter
catechism, and were interested in arithmetic; all of whom were as exactly
alike as their homes, and of a piece with the monotony in which they
lived. Paul never went up Cordelia Street without a shudder of loathing.
His home was next the house of the Cumberland minister. He approached it
tonight with the nerveless sense of defeat, the hopeless feeling of
sinking back forever into ugliness and commonness that he had always had
when he came home. The moment he turned into Cordelia Street he felt the
waters close above his head. After each of these orgies of living, he
experienced all the physical depression which follows a debauch; the
loathing of respectable beds, of common food, of a house permeated by
kitchen odours; a shuddering repulsion for the flavourless, colourless
mass of every-day existence; a morbid desire for cool things and soft
lights and fresh flowers.

The nearer he approached the house, the more absolutely unequal Paul felt
to the sight of it all; his ugly sleeping chamber; the cold bath-room
with the grimy zinc tub, the cracked mirror, the dripping spiggots; his
father, at the top of the stairs, his hairy legs sticking out from his
nightshirt, his feet thrust into carpet slippers. He was so much later
than usual that there would certainly be inquiries and reproaches. Paul
stopped short before the door. He felt that he could not be accosted by
his father tonight; that he could not toss again on that miserable bed.
He would not go in. He would tell his father that he had no car fare, and
it was raining so hard he had gone home with one of the boys and stayed
all night.

Meanwhile, he was wet and cold. He went around to the back of the house
and tried one of the basement windows, found it open, raised it
cautiously, and scrambled down the cellar wall to the floor. There he
stood, holding his breath, terrified by the noise he had made; but the
floor above him was silent, and there was no creak on the stairs. He
found a soap-box, and carried it over to the soft ring of light that
streamed from the furnace door, and sat down. He was horribly afraid of
rats, so he did not try to sleep, but sat looking distrustfully at the
dark, still terrified lest he might have awakened his father. In such
reactions, after one of the experiences which made days and nights out of
the dreary blanks of the calendar, when his senses were deadened, Paul's
head was always singularly clear. Suppose his father had heard him
getting in at the window and had come down and shot him for a burglar ?
Then, again, suppose his father had come down, pistol in hand, and he had
cried out in time to save himself, and his father had been horrified to
think how nearly he had killed him ? Then, again, suppose a day should
come when his father would remember that night, and wish there had been
no warning cry to stay his hand ? With this last supposition Paul
entertained himself until daybreak.

The following Sunday was fine; the sodden November chill was broken by
the last flash of autumnal summer. In the morning Paul had to go to
church and Sabbath-school, as always. On seasonable Sunday afternoons the
burghers of Cordelia Street usually sat out on their front "stoops," and
talked to their neighbours on the next stoop, or called to those across
the street in neighbourly fashion. The men sat placidly on gay cushions
placed upon the steps that led down to the sidewalk, while the women, in
their Sunday "waists," sat in rockers on the cramped porches, pretending
to be greatly at their ease. The children played in the streets; there
were so many of them that the place resembled the recreation grounds of a
kindergarten. The men on the steps--all in their shirt sleeves, their
vests unbuttoned--sat with their legs well apart, their stomachs
comfortably protruding, and talked of the prices of things, or told
anecdotes of the sagacity of their various chiefs and overlords. They
occasionally looked over the multitude of squabbling children, listened
affectionately to their high-pitched, nasal voices, smiling to see their
own proclivities reproduced in their offspring, and interspersed their
legends of the iron kings with remarks about their sons' progress at
school, their grades in arithmetic, and the amounts they had saved in
their toy banks.

On this last Sunday of November, Paul sat all the afternoon on the lowest
step of his "stoop," staring into the street, while his sisters, in their
rockers, were talking to the minister's daughters next door about how
many shirt-waists they had made in the last week, and how many waffles
some one had eaten at the last church supper. When the weather was warm,
and his father was in a particularly jovial frame of mind, the girls made
lemonade, which was always brought out in a red-glass pitcher, ornamented
with forget-me-nots in blue enamel. This the girls thought very fine, and
the neighbours joked about the suspicious colour of the pitcher.

Today Paul's father, on the top step, was talking to a young man who
shifted a restless baby from knee to knee. He happened to be the young
man who was daily held up to Paul as a model, and after whom it was his
father's dearest hope that he would pattern. This young man was of a
ruddy complexion, with a compressed, red mouth, and faded, near-sighted
eyes, over which he wore thick spectacles, with gold bows that curved
about his ears. He was clerk to one of the magnates of a great steel
corporation, and was looked upon in Cordelia Street as a young
man with a future. There was a story that, some five years ago--he was
now barely twenty-six--he had been a trifle 'dissipated,' but in order to
curb his appetites and save the loss of time and strength that a sowing
of wild oats might have entailed, he had taken his chief's advice, oft
reiterated to his employees, and at twenty-one had married the first
woman whom he could persuade to share his fortunes. She happened to be an
angular school-mistress, much older than he, who also wore thick glasses,
and who had now borne him four children, all near-sighted, like herself.

The young man was relating how his chief, now cruising in the
Mediterranean, kept in touch with all the details of the business,
arranging his office hours on his yacht just as though he were at home,
and "knocking off work enough to keep two stenographers busy." His father
told, in turn, the plan his corporation was considering, of putting in an
electric railway plant at Cairo. Paul snapped his teeth; he had an awful
apprehension that they might spoil it all before he got there. Yet he
rather liked to hear these legends of the iron kings, that were told and
retold on Sundays and holidays; these stories of palaces in Venice,
yachts on the Mediterranean, and high play at Monte Carlo appealed to his
fancy, and he was interested in the triumphs of cash boys who had become
famous, though he had no mind for the cash-boy stage.

After supper was over, and he had helped to dry the dishes, Paul
nervously asked his father whether he could go to George's to get some
help in his geometry, and still more nervously asked for car-fare. This
latter request he had to repeat, as his father, on principle, did not
like to hear requests for money, whether much or little. He asked Paul
whether he could not go to some boy who lived nearer, and told him that
he ought not to leave his school work until Sunday; but he gave him the
dime. He was not a poor man, but he had a worthy ambition to come up in
the world. His only reason for allowing Paul to usher was that he thought
a boy ought to be earning a little.

Paul bounded upstairs, scrubbed the greasy odour of the dish-water from
his hands with the ill-smelling soap he hated, and then shook over
his fingers a few drops of violet water from the bottle he kept hidden in
his drawer. He left the house with his geometry conspicuously under his
arm, and the moment he got out of Cordelia Street and boarded a downtown
car, he shook off the lethargy of two deadening days, and began to live
again.

The leading juvenile of the permanent stock company which played at one
of the downtown theatres was an acquaintance of Paul's, and the
boy had been invited to drop in at the Sunday-night rehearsals whenever
he could. For more than a year Paul had spent every available moment
loitering about Charley Edwards's dressing-room. He had won a place among
Edwards's following not only because the young actor, who could not
afford to employ a dresser, often found him useful, but because he
recognized in Paul something akin to what churchmen term "vocation."

It was at the theatre and at Carnegie Hall that Paul really lived; the
rest was but a sleep and a forgetting. This was Paul's fairy tale, and
it had for him all the allurement of a secret love. The moment he inhaled
the gassy, painty, dusty odour behind the scenes, he breathed like a
prisoner set free, and felt within him the possibility of doing or saying
splendid, brilliant things. The moment the cracked orchestra beat out the
overture from _Martha_, or jerked at the serenade from _Rigoletto_, all
stupid and ugly things slid from him, and his senses were deliciously,
yet delicately fired.

Perhaps it was because, in Paul's world, the natural nearly always wore
the guise of ugliness, that a certain element of artificiality seemed to
him necessary in beauty. Perhaps it was because his experience of life
elsewhere was so full of Sabbath-school picnics, petty economies,
wholesome advice as to how to succeed in life, and the unescapable odours
of cooking, that he found this existence so alluring, these smartly-clad
men and women so attractive, that he was so moved by these starry apple
orchards that bloomed perennially under the lime-light.

It would be difficult to put it strongly enough how convincingly the
stage entrance of that theatre was for Paul the actual portal of Romance.
Certainly none of the company ever suspected it, least of all Charley
Edwards. It was very like the old stories that used to float about London
of fabulously rich Jews, who had subterranean halls, with palms, and
fountains, and soft lamps and richly apparelled women who never saw the
disenchanting light of London day. So, in the midst of that smoke-palled
city, enamoured of figures and grimy toil, Paul had his secret temple,
his wishing-carpet, his bit of blue-and-white Mediterranean shore bathed
in perpetual sunshine.

Several of Paul's teachers had a theory that his imagination had been
perverted by garish fiction; but the truth was, he scarcely ever read at
all. The books at home were not such as would either tempt or corrupt a
youthful mind, and as for reading the novels that some of his friends
urged upon him--well, he got what he wanted much more quickly from music;
any sort of music, from an orchestra to a barrel organ. He needed only
the spark, the indescribable thrill that made his imagination master of
his senses, and he could make plots and pictures enough of his own. It
was equally true that he was not stage-struck--not, at any rate, in the
usual acceptation of that expression. He had no desire to become an
actor, any more than he had to become a musician. He felt no necessity to
do any of these things; what he wanted was to see, to be in the
atmosphere, float on the wave of it, to be carried out, blue league after
blue league, away from everything.

After a night behind the scenes, Paul found the school-room more than
ever repulsive; the bare floors and naked walls; the prosy men who never
wore frock coats, or violets in their buttonholes; the women with their
dull gowns, shrill voices, and pitiful seriousness about prepositions
that govern the dative. He could not bear to have the other pupils think,
for a moment, that he took these people seriously; he must convey to
them that he considered it all trivial, and was there only by way of a
joke, anyway. He had autograph pictures of all the members of the stock
company which he showed his classmates, telling them the most incredible
stories of his familiarity with these people, of his acquaintance with
the soloists who came to Carnegie Hall, his suppers with them and the
flowers he sent them. When these stories lost their effect, and his
audience grew listless, he would bid all the boys good-bye, announcing
that he was going to travel for awhile; going to Naples, to California,
to Egypt. Then, next Monday, he would slip back, conscious and nervously
smiling; his sister was ill, and he would have to defer his voyage until
spring.

Matters went steadily worse with Paul at school. In the itch to let his
instructors know how heartily he despised them, and how thoroughly he was
appreciated elsewhere, he mentioned once or twice that he had no time to
fool with theorems; adding--with a twitch of the eyebrows and a touch of
that nervous bravado which so perplexed them--that he was helping the
people down at the stock company; they were old friends of his.

The upshot of the matter was, that the Principal went to Paul's father,
and Paul was taken out of school and put to work. The manager at Carnegie
Hall was told to get another usher in his stead; the doorkeeper at the
theatre was warned not to admit him to the house; and Charley Edwards
remorsefully promised the boy's father not to see him again.

The members of the stock company were vastly amused when some of Paul's
stories reached them--especially the women. They were hard-working women,
most of them supporting indolent husbands or brothers, and they laughed
rather bitterly at having stirred the boy to such fervid and florid
inventions. They agreed with the faculty and with his father, that Paul's
was a bad case.

The east-bound train was ploughing through a January snow-storm; the dull
dawn was beginning to show grey when the engine whistled a mile out of
Newark. Paul started up from the seat where he had lain curled in uneasy
slumber, rubbed the breath-misted window glass with his hand, and peered
out. The snow was whirling in curling eddies above the white bottom
lands, and the drifts lay already deep in the fields and along the
fences, while here and there the long dead grass and dried weed stalks
protruded black above it. Lights shone from the scattered houses, and
a gang of labourers who stood beside the track waved their lanterns.

Paul had slept very little, and he felt grimy and uncomfortable. He had
made the all-night journey in a day coach because he was afraid if he
took a Pullman he might be seen by some Pittsburgh business man who had
noticed him in Denny & Carson's office. When the whistle woke him, he
clutched quickly at his breast pocket, glancing about him with an
uncertain smile. But the little, clay-bespattered Italians were still
sleeping, the slatternly women across the aisle were in open-mouthed
oblivion, and even the crumby, crying babies were for the nonce stilled.
Paul settled back to struggle with his impatience as best he could.

When he arrived at the Jersey City station, he hurried through his
breakfast, manifestly ill at ease and keeping a sharp eye about him.
After he reached the Twenty-third Street station, he consulted a cabman,
and had himself driven to a men's furnishing establishment which was just
opening for the day. He spent upward of two hours there, buying with
endless reconsidering and great care. His new street suit he put on in
the fitting-room; the frock coat and dress clothes he had bundled into
the cab with his new shirts. Then he drove to a hatter's and a shoe
house. His next errand was at Tiffany's, where he selected silver mounted
brushes and a scarf-pin. He would not wait to have his silver marked, he
said. Lastly, he stopped at a trunk shop on Broadway, and had his
purchases packed into various travelling bags.

It was a little after one o'clock when he drove up to the Waldorf, and,
after settling with the cabman, went into the office. He registered from
Washington; said his mother and father had been abroad, and that he had
come down to await the arrival of their steamer. He told his story
plausibly and had no trouble, since he offered to pay for them in
advance, in engaging his rooms; a sleeping-room, sitting-room and bath.

Not once, but a hundred times Paul had planned this entry into New York.
He had gone over every detail of it with Charley Edwards, and in his
scrap book at home there were pages of description about New York hotels,
cut from the Sunday papers.

When he was shown to his sitting-room on the eighth floor, he saw at a
glance that everything was as it should be; there was but one detail in
his mental picture that the place did not realize, so he rang for the
bell boy and sent him down for flowers. He moved about nervously until
the boy returned, putting away his new linen and fingering it delightedly
as he did so. When the flowers came, he put them hastily into water, and
then tumbled into a hot bath. Presently he came out of his white
bath-room, resplendent in his new silk underwear, and playing with the
tassels of his red robe. The snow was whirling so fiercely outside his
windows that he could scarcely see across the street; but within, the air
was deliciously soft and fragrant. He put the violets and jonquils on the
tabouret beside the couch, and threw himself down with a long sigh,
covering himself with a Roman blanket. He was thoroughly tired; he
had been in such haste, he had stood up to such a strain, covered so much
ground in the last twenty-four hours, that he wanted to think how it had
all come about. Lulled by the sound of the wind, the warm air, and the
cool fragrance of the flowers, he sank into deep, drowsy retrospection.

It had been wonderfully simple; when they had shut him out of the theatre
and concert hall, when they had taken away his bone, the whole thing was
virtually determined. The rest was a mere matter of opportunity. The only
thing that at all surprised him was his own courage--for he realized well
enough that he had always been tormented by fear, a sort of apprehensive
dread that, of late years, as the meshes of the lies he had told closed
about him, had been pulling the muscles of his body tighter and tighter.
Until now, he could not remember a time when he had not been dreading
something. Even when he was a little boy, it was always there--behind
him, or before, or on either side. There had always been the shadowed
corner, the dark place into which he dared not look, but from which
something seemed always to be watching him--and Paul had done things that
were not pretty to watch, he knew.

But now he had a curious sense of relief, as though he had at last thrown
down the gauntlet to the thing in the corner.

Yet it was but a day since he had been sulking in the traces; but
yesterday afternoon that he had been sent to the bank with Denny &
Carson's deposit, as usual--but this time he was instructed to leave the
book to be balanced. There was above two thousand dollars in checks, and
nearly a thousand in the bank notes which he had taken from the book and
quietly transferred to his pocket. At the bank he had made out a new
deposit slip. His nerves had been steady enough to permit of his
returning to the office, where he had finished his work and asked for a
full day's holiday tomorrow, Saturday, giving a perfectly reasonable
pretext. The bank book, he knew, would not be returned before Monday or
Tuesday, and his father would be out of town for the next week. From the
time he slipped the bank notes into his pocket until he boarded the night
train for New York, he had not known a moment's hesitation.

How astonishingly easy it had all been; here he was, the thing done; and
this time there would be no awakening, no figure at the top of the
stairs. He watched the snow flakes whirling by his window until he fell
asleep.

When he awoke, it was four o'clock in the afternoon. He bounded up with a
start; one of his precious days gone already! He spent nearly an hour in
dressing, watching every stage of his toilet carefully in the mirror.
Everything was quite perfect; he was exactly the kind of boy he had
always wanted to be.

When he went downstairs, Paul took a carriage and drove up Fifth avenue
toward the Park. The snow had somewhat abated; carriages and tradesmen's
wagons were hurrying soundlessly to and fro in the winter twilight; boys
in woollen mufflers were shovelling off the doorsteps; the avenue stages
made fine spots of colour against the white street. Here and there on the
corners whole flower gardens blooming behind glass windows, against which
the snow flakes stuck and melted; violets, roses, carnations, lilies of
the valley--somehow vastly more lovely and alluring that they blossomed
thus unnaturally in the snow. The Park itself was a wonderful stage
winter-piece.

When he returned, the pause of the twilight had ceased, and the tune of
the streets had changed. The snow was falling faster, lights streamed
from the hotels that reared their many stories fearlessly up into the
storm, defying the raging Atlantic winds. A long, black stream of
carriages poured down the avenue, intersected here and there by other
streams, tending horizontally. There were a score of cabs about the
entrance of his hotel, and his driver had to wait. Boys in livery were
running in and out of the awning stretched across the sidewalk, up and
down the red velvet carpet laid from the door to the street. Above,
about, within it all, was the rumble and roar, the hurry and toss of
thousands of human beings as hot for pleasure as himself, and on every
side of him towered the glaring affirmation of the omnipotence of wealth.

The boy set his teeth and drew his shoulders together in a spasm of
realization; the plot of all dramas, the text of all romances, the
nervestuff of all sensations was whirling about him like the snow flakes.
He burnt like a faggot in a tempest.

When Paul came down to dinner, the music of the orchestra floated up the
elevator shaft to greet him. As he stepped into the thronged corridor, he
sank back into one of the chairs against the wall to get his breath. The
lights, the chatter, the perfumes, the bewildering medley of colour--he
had, for a moment, the feeling of not being able to stand it. But only
for a moment; these were his own people, he told himself. He went slowly
about the corridors, through the writing-rooms, smoking-rooms,
reception-rooms, as though he were exploring the chambers of an enchanted
palace, built and peopled for him alone.

When he reached the dining-room he sat down at a table near a window. The
flowers, the white linen, the many-coloured wine glasses, the gay
toilettes of the women, the low popping of corks, the undulating
repetitions of the _Blue Danube_ from the orchestra, all flooded Paul's
dream with bewildering radiance. When the roseate tinge of his champagne
was added--that cold, precious, bubbling stuff that creamed and foamed in
his glass--Paul wondered that there were honest men in the world at all.
This was what all the world was fighting for, he reflected; this was
what all the struggle was about. He doubted the reality of his past. Had
he ever known a place called Cordelia Street, a place where fagged
looking business men boarded the early car ? Mere rivets in a machine they
seemed to Paul,--sickening men, with combings of children's hair always
hanging to their coats, and the smell of cooking in their clothes.
Cordelia Street--Ah, that belonged to another time and country! Had
he not always been thus, had he not sat here night after night, from as
far back as he could remember, looking pensively over just such
shimmering textures, and slowly twirling the stem of a glass like this
one between his thumb and middle finger ? He rather thought he had.

He was not in the least abashed or lonely. He had no especial desire to
meet or to know any of these people; all he demanded was the right to
look on and conjecture, to watch the pageant. The mere stage properties
were all he contended for. Nor was he lonely later in the evening, in
his loge at the Opera. He was entirely rid of his nervous misgivings, of
his forced aggressiveness, of the imperative desire to show himself
different from his surroundings. He felt now that his surroundings
explained him. Nobody questioned the purple; he had only to wear it
passively. He had only to glance down at his dress coat to reassure
himself that here it would be impossible for anyone to humiliate him.

He found it hard to leave his beautiful sitting-room to go to bed that
night, and sat long watching the raging storm from his turret window.
When he went to sleep, it was with the lights turned on in his bedroom;
partly because of his old timidity, and partly so that, if he should
wake in the night, there would be no wretched moment of doubt, no
horrible suspicion of yellow wall-paper, or of Washington and Calvin
above his bed.

On Sunday morning the city was practically snow-bound. Paul breakfasted
late, and in the afternoon he fell in with a wild San Francisco boy,
a freshman at Yale, who said he had run down for a "little flyer" over
Sunday. The young man offered to show Paul the night side of the town,
and the two boys went off together after dinner, not returning to the
hotel until seven o'clock the next morning. They had started out in the
confiding warmth of a champagne friendship, but their parting in the
elevator was singularly cool. The freshman pulled himself together to
make his train, and Paul went to bed. He awoke at two o'clock in the
afternoon, very thirsty and dizzy, and rang for ice-water, coffee, and
the Pittsburgh papers.

On the part of the hotel management, Paul excited no suspicion. There was
this to be said for him, that he wore his spoils with dignity and in
no way made himself conspicuous. His chief greediness lay in his ears and
eyes, and his excesses were not offensive ones. His dearest pleasures
were the grey winter twilights in his sitting-room; his quiet enjoyment
of his flowers, his clothes, his wide divan, his cigarette and his sense
of power. He could not remember a time when he had felt so at peace with
himself. The mere release from the necessity of petty lying, lying every
day and every day, restored his self-respect. He had never lied for
pleasure, even at school; but to make himself noticed and admired, to
assert his difference from other Cordelia Street boys; and he felt a good
deal more manly, more honest, even, now that he had no need for boastful
pretensions, now that he could, as his actor friends used to say, "dress
the part." It was characteristic that remorse did not occur to him. His
golden days went by without a shadow, and he made each as perfect as he
could.

On the eighth day after his arrival in New York, he found the whole
affair exploited in the Pittsburgh papers, exploited with a wealth of
detail which indicated that local news of a sensational nature was at a
low ebb. The firm of Denny & Carson announced that the boy's father
had refunded the full amount of his theft, and that they had no intention
of prosecuting. The Cumberland minister had been interviewed, and
expressed his hope of yet reclaiming the motherless lad, and Paul's
Sabbath-school teacher declared that she would spare no effort to that
end. The rumour had reached Pittsburgh that the boy had been seen in a
New York hotel, and his father had gone East to find him and bring
him home.

Paul had just come in to dress for dinner; he sank into a chair,
weak in the knees, and clasped his head in his hands. It was to be worse
than jail, even; the tepid waters of Cordelia Street were to close over
him finally and forever. The grey monotony stretched before him in
hopeless, unrelieved years; Sabbath-school, Young People's Meeting, the
yellow-papered room, the damp dish-towels; it all rushed back upon him
with sickening vividness. He had the old feeling that the orchestra had
suddenly stopped, the sinking sensation that the play was over. The sweat
broke out on his face, and he sprang to his feet, looked about him with
his white, conscious smile, and winked at himself in the mirror. With
something of the childish belief in miracles with which he had so often
gone to class, all his lessons unlearned, Paul dressed and dashed
whistling down the corridor to the elevator.

He had no sooner entered the dining-room and caught the measure of the
music, than his remembrance was lightened by his old elastic power of
claiming the moment, mounting with it, and finding it all sufficient. The
glare and glitter about him, the mere scenic accessories had again, and
for the last time, their old potency. He would show himself that he was
game, he would finish the thing splendidly. He doubted, more than ever,
the existence of Cordelia Street, and for the first time he drank his
wine recklessly. Was he not, after all, one of these fortunate beings ?
Was he not still himself, and in his own place ? He drummed a nervous
accompaniment to the music and looked about him, telling himself over and
over that it had paid.

He reflected drowsily, to the swell of the violin and the chill sweetness
of his wine, that he might have done it more wisely. He might have caught
an outbound steamer and been well out of their clutches before now. But
the other side of the world had seemed too far away and too uncertain
then; he could not have waited for it; his need had been too sharp. If he
had to choose over again, he would do the same thing tomorrow. He looked
affectionately about the dining-room, now gilded with a soft mist. Ah, it
had paid indeed!

Paul was awakened next morning by a painful throbbing in his head and
feet. He had thrown himself across the bed without undressing, and had
slept with his shoes on. His limbs and hands were lead heavy, and his
tongue and throat were parched. There came upon him one of those fateful
attacks of clear-headedness that never occurred except when he was
physically exhausted and his nerves hung loose. He lay still and closed
his eyes and let the tide of realities wash over him.

His father was in New York; "stopping at some joint or other," he told
himself. The memory of successive summers on the front stoop fell upon
him like a weight of black water. He had not a hundred dollars left; and
he knew now, more than ever, that money was everything, the wall that
stood between all he loathed and all he wanted. The thing was winding
itself up; he had thought of that on his first glorious day in New York,
and had even provided a way to snap the thread. It lay on his
dressing-table now; he had got it out last night when he came blindly up
from dinner,--but the shiny metal hurt his eyes, and he disliked the look
of it, anyway.

He rose and moved about with a painful effort, succumbing now and again
to attacks of nausea. It was the old depression exaggerated; all the
world had become Cordelia Street. Yet somehow he was not afraid of
anything, was absolutely calm; perhaps because he had looked into the
dark corner at last, and knew. It was bad enough, what he saw there; but
somehow not so bad as his long fear of it had been. He saw everything
clearly now. He had a feeling that he had made the best of it, that he
had lived the sort of life he was meant to live, and for half an hour he
sat staring at the revolver. But he told himself that was not the way, so
he went downstairs and took a cab to the ferry.

When Paul arrived at Newark, he got off the train and took another cab,
directing the driver to follow the Pennsylvania tracks out of the town.
The snow lay heavy on the roadways and had drifted deep in the open
fields. Only here and there the dead grass or dried weed stalks
projected, singularly black, above it. Once well into the country, Paul
dismissed the carriage and walked, floundering along the tracks, his mind
a medley of irrelevant things. He seemed to hold in his brain an actual
picture of everything he had seen that morning. He remembered every
feature of both his drivers, the toothless old woman from whom he had
bought the red flowers in his coat, the agent from whom he had got his
ticket, and all of his fellow-passengers on the ferry. His mind, unable
to cope with vital matters near at hand, worked feverishly and deftly
at sorting and grouping these images. They made for him a part of the
ugliness of the world, of the ache in his head, and the bitter burning on
his tongue. He stooped and put a handful of snow into his mouth as he
walked, but that, too, seemed hot. When he reached a little hillside,
where the tracks ran through a cut some twenty feet below him, he stopped
and sat down.

The carnations in his coat were drooping with the cold, he noticed; all
their red glory over. It occurred to him that all the flowers he had seen
in the show windows that first night must have gone the same way, long
before this. It was only one splendid breath they had, in spite of their
brave mockery at the winter outside the glass. It was a losing game in
the end, it seemed, this revolt against the homilies by which the world
is run. Paul took one of the blossoms carefully from his coat and scooped
a little hole in the snow, where he covered it up. Then he dozed a
while, from his weak condition, seeming insensible to the cold.

The sound of an approaching train woke him, and he started to his feet,
remembering only his resolution, and afraid lest he should be too late.
He stood watching the approaching locomotive, his teeth chattering, his
lips drawn away from them in a frightened smile; once or twice he glanced
nervously sidewise, as though he were being watched. When the right
moment came, he jumped. As he fell, the folly of his haste occurred to
him with merciless clearness, the vastness of what he had left undone.
There flashed through his brain, clearer than ever before, the blue of
Adriatic water, the yellow of Algerian sands.

He felt something strike his chest,--his body was being thrown swiftly
through the air, on and on, immeasurably far and fast, while his limbs
gently relaxed. Then, because the picture making mechanism was crushed,
the disturbing visions flashed into black, and Paul dropped back into the
immense design of things.




A Wagner Matinee




I received one morning a letter, written in pale ink on glassy,
blue-lined note-paper, and bearing the postmark of a little Nebraska
village. This communication, worn and rubbed, looking as if it had been
carried for some days in a coat pocket that was none too clean, was from
my uncle Howard, and informed me that his wife had been left a small
legacy by a bachelor relative, and that it would be necessary for her to
go to Boston to attend to the settling of the estate. He requested me to
meet her at the station and render her whatever services might be
necessary. On examining the date indicated as that of her arrival, I
found it to be no later than tomorrow. He had characteristically delayed
writing until, had I been away from home for a day, I must have missed my
aunt altogether.

The name of my Aunt Georgiana opened before me a gulf of recollection so
wide and deep that, as the letter dropped from my hand, I felt suddenly a
stranger to all the present conditions of my existence, wholly ill at
ease and out of place amid the familiar surroundings of my study. I
became, in short, the gangling farmer-boy my aunt had known, scourged
with chilblains and bashfulness, my hands cracked and sore from the corn
husking. I sat again before her parlour organ, fumbling the scales with
my stiff, red fingers, while she, beside me, made canvas mittens for the
huskers.

The next morning, after preparing my landlady for a visitor, I set out
for the station. When the train arrived I had some difficulty in finding
my aunt. She was the last of the passengers to alight, and it was not
until I got her into the carriage that she seemed really to recognize me.
She had come all the way in a day coach; her linen duster had become
black with soot and her black bonnet grey with dust during the journey.
When we arrived at my boarding-house the landlady put her to bed at once
and I did not see her again until the next morning.

Whatever shock Mrs. Springer experienced at my aunt's appearance, she
considerately concealed. As for myself, I saw my aunt's battered figure
with that feeling of awe and respect with which we behold explorers who
have left their ears and fingers north of Franz-Joseph-Land, or their
health somewhere along the Upper Congo. My Aunt Georgiana had been a
music teacher at the Boston Conservatory, somewhere back in the latter
sixties. One summer, while visiting in the little village among the Green
Mountains where her ancestors had dwelt for generations, she had kindled
the callow fancy of my uncle, Howard Carpenter, then an idle, shiftless
boy of twenty-one. When she returned to her duties in Boston, Howard
followed her, and the upshot of this infatuation was that she eloped with
him, eluding the reproaches of her family and the criticism of her
friends by going with him to the Nebraska frontier. Carpenter, who, of
course, had no money, took up a homestead in Red Willow County, fifty
miles from the railroad. There they had measured off their land
themselves, driving across the prairie in a wagon, to the wheel of which
they had tied a red cotton handkerchief, and counting its revolutions.
They built a dug-out in the red hillside, one of those cave dwellings
whose inmates so often reverted to primitive conditions. Their water they
got from the lagoons where the buffalo drank, and their slender stock of
provisions was always at the mercy of bands of roving Indians. For thirty
years my aunt had not been farther than fifty miles from the homestead.

I owed to this woman most of the good that ever came my way in my
boyhood, and had a reverential affection for her. During the years
when I was riding herd for my uncle, my aunt, after cooking the three
meals--the first of which was ready at six o'clock in the morning--and
putting the six children to bed, would often stand until midnight at her
ironing-board, with me at the kitchen table beside her, hearing me recite
Latin declensions and conjugations, gently shaking me when my drowsy head
sank down over a page of irregular verbs. It was to her, at her ironing
or mending, that I read my first Shakspere, and her old text-book on
mythology was the first that ever came into my empty hands. She taught me
my scales and exercises on the little parlour organ which her husband had
bought her after fifteen years during which she had not so much as seen a
musical instrument. She would sit beside me by the hour, darning and
counting, while I struggled with the "Joyous Farmer." She seldom talked
to me about music, and I understood why. Once when I had been doggedly
beating out some easy passages from an old score of _Euryanthe_ I had
found among her music books, she came up to me and, putting her hands
over my eyes, gently drew my head back upon her shoulder, saying
tremulously, "Don't love it so well, Clark, or it may be taken from you."

When my aunt appeared on the morning after her arrival in Boston, she was
still in a semi-somnambulant state. She seemed not to realize that she
was in the city where she had spent her youth, the place longed for
hungrily half a lifetime. She had been so wretchedly train-sick
throughout the journey that she had no recollection of anything but her
discomfort, and, to all intents and purposes, there were but a few hours
of nightmare between the farm in Red Willow County and my study on
Newbury Street. I had planned a little pleasure for her that afternoon,
to repay her for some of the glorious moments she had given me when we
used to milk together in the straw-thatched cowshed and she, because I
was more than usually tired, or because her husband had spoken sharply to
me, would tell me of the splendid performance of the _Huguenots_ she
had seen in Paris, in her youth.

At two o'clock the Symphony Orchestra was to give a Wagner program, and I
intended to take my aunt; though, as I conversed with her, I grew
doubtful about her enjoyment of it. I suggested our visiting the
Conservatory and the Common before lunch, but she seemed altogether too
timid to wish to venture out. She questioned me absently about various
changes in the city, but she was chiefly concerned that she had forgotten
to leave instructions about feeding half-skimmed milk to a certain
weakling calf, "old Maggie's calf, you know, Clark," she explained,
evidently having forgotten how long I had been away. She was further
troubled because she had neglected to tell her daughter about the
freshly-opened kit of mackerel in the cellar, which would spoil if it
were not used directly.

I asked her whether she had ever heard any of the Wagnerian operas, and
found that she had not, though she was perfectly familiar with their
respective situations, and had once possessed the piano score of _The
Flying Dutchman_. I began to think it would be best to get her back to
Red Willow County without waking her, and regretted having suggested the
concert.

From the time we entered the concert hall, however, she was a trifle less
passive and inert, and for the first time seemed to perceive her
surroundings. I had felt some trepidation lest she might become aware of
her queer, country clothes, or might experience some painful
embarrassment at stepping suddenly into the world to which she had been
dead for a quarter of a century. But, again, I found how superficially I
had judged her. She sat looking about her with eyes as impersonal, almost
as stony, as those with which the granite Rameses in a museum watches the
froth and fret that ebbs and flows about his pedestal. I have seen this
same aloofness in old miners who drift into the Brown hotel at Denver,
their pockets full of bullion, their linen soiled, their haggard faces
unshaven; standing in the thronged corridors as solitary as though they
were still in a frozen camp on the Yukon.

The matinée audience was made up chiefly of women. One lost the contour
of faces and figures, indeed any effect of line whatever, and there was
only the colour of bodices past counting, the shimmer of fabrics soft and
firm, silky and sheer; red, mauve, pink, blue, lilac, purple, écru, rose,
yellow, cream, and white, all the colours that an impressionist finds in
a sunlit landscape, with here and there the dead shadow of a frock coat.
My Aunt Georgiana regarded them as though they had been so many daubs of
tube-paint on a palette.

When the musicians came out and took their places, she gave a little stir
of anticipation, and looked with quickening interest down over the rail
at that invariable grouping, perhaps the first wholly familiar thing that
had greeted her eye since she had left old Maggie and her weakling
calf. I could feel how all those details sank into her soul, for I had
not forgotten how they had sunk into mine when I came fresh from
ploughing forever and forever between green aisles of corn, where, as in
a treadmill, one might walk from daybreak to dusk without perceiving a
shadow of change. The clean profiles of the musicians, the gloss of their
linen, the dull black of their coats, the beloved shapes of the
instruments, the patches of yellow light on the smooth, varnished
bellies of the 'cellos and the bass viols in the rear, the restless,
wind-tossed forest of fiddle necks and bows--I recalled how, in the first
orchestra I ever heard, those long bow-strokes seemed to draw the heart
out of me, as a conjurer's stick reels out yards of paper ribbon from
a hat.

The first number was the Tannhauser overture. When the horns drew out the
first strain of the Pilgrim's chorus, Aunt Georgiana clutched my coat
sleeve. Then it was I first realized that for her this broke a silence of
thirty years. With the battle between the two motives, with the frenzy of
the Venusberg theme and its ripping of strings, there came to me an
overwhelming sense of the waste and wear we are so powerless to combat;
and I saw again the tall, naked house on the prairie, black and grim as a
wooden fortress; the black pond where I had learned to swim, its margin
pitted with sun-dried cattle tracks; the rain gullied clay banks about
the naked house, the four dwarf ash seedlings where the dish-cloths were
always hung to dry before the kitchen door. The world there was the flat
world of the ancients; to the east, a cornfield that stretched to
daybreak; to the west, a corral that reached to sunset; between, the
conquests of peace, dearer-bought than those of war.

The overture closed, my aunt released my coat sleeve, but she said
nothing. She sat staring dully at the orchestra. What, I wondered, did
she get from it ? She had been a good pianist in her day, I knew, and her
musical education had been broader than that of most music teachers of a
quarter of a century ago. She had often told me of Mozart's operas and
Meyerbeer's, and I could remember hearing her sing, years ago, certain
melodies of Verdi. When I had fallen ill with a fever in her house she
used to sit by my cot in the evening--when the cool, night wind blew in
through the faded mosquito netting tacked over the window and I lay
watching a certain bright star that burned red above the cornfield--and
sing "Home to our mountains, O, let us return!" in a way fit to break the
heart of a Vermont boy near dead of homesickness already.

I watched her closely through the prelude to Tristan and Isolde, trying
vainly to conjecture what that seething turmoil of strings and winds
might mean to her, but she sat mutely staring at the violin bows that
drove obliquely downward, like the pelting streaks of rain in a summer
shower. Had this music any message for her ? Had she enough left to at all
comprehend this power which had kindled the world since she had left it ?
I was in a fever of curiosity, but Aunt Georgiana sat silent upon her
peak in Darien. She preserved this utter immobility throughout
the number from The Flying Dutchman, though her fingers worked
mechanically upon her black dress, as if, of themselves, they were
recalling the piano score they had once played. Poor hands! They had been
stretched and twisted into mere tentacles to hold and lift and knead
with;--on one of them a thin, worn band that had once been a wedding
ring. As I pressed and gently quieted one of those groping hands, I
remembered with quivering eyelids their services for me in other days.

Soon after the tenor began the "Prize Song," I heard a quick drawn breath
and turned to my aunt. Her eyes were closed, but the tears were
glistening on her cheeks, and I think, in a moment more, they were in my
eyes as well. It never really died, then--the soul which can suffer so
excruciatingly and so interminably; it withers to the outward eye only;
like that strange moss which can lie on a dusty shelf half a century and
yet, if placed in water, grows green again. She wept so throughout the
development and elaboration of the melody.

During the intermission before the second half, I questioned my aunt and
found that the "Prize Song" was not new to her. Some years before there
had drifted to the farm in Red Willow County a young German, a tramp
cow-puncher, who had sung in the chorus at Bayreuth when he was a boy,
along with the other peasant boys and girls. Of a Sunday morning he used
to sit on his gingham-sheeted bed in the hands' bedroom which opened off
the kitchen, cleaning the leather of his boots and saddle, singing the
"Prize Song," while my aunt went about her work in the kitchen. She had
hovered over him until she had prevailed upon him to join the country
church, though his sole fitness for this step, in so far as I could
gather, lay in his boyish face and his possession of this divine melody.
Shortly afterward, he had gone to town on the Fourth of July, been drunk
for several days, lost his money at a faro table, ridden a saddled Texas
steer on a bet, and disappeared with a fractured collar-bone. All this
my aunt told me huskily, wanderingly, as though she were talking in the
weak lapses of illness.

"Well, we have come to better things than the old Trovatore at any rate,
Aunt Georgie ?" I queried, with a well meant effort at jocularity.

Her lip quivered and she hastily put her handkerchief up to her mouth.
From behind it she murmured, "And you have been hearing this ever since
you left me, Clark ?" Her question was the gentlest and saddest of
reproaches.

The second half of the program consisted of four numbers from the _Ring,_
and closed with Siegfried's funeral march. My aunt wept quietly, but
almost continuously, as a shallow vessel overflows in a rain-storm. From
time to time her dim eyes looked up at the lights, burning softly under
their dull glass globes.

The deluge of sound poured on and on; I never knew what she found in the
shining current of it; I never knew how far it bore her, or past what
happy islands. From the trembling of her face I could well believe that
before the last number she had been carried out where the myriad graves
are, into the grey, nameless burying grounds of the sea; or into some
world of death vaster yet, where, from the beginning of the world, hope
has lain down with hope and dream with dream and, renouncing, slept.

The concert was over; the people filed out of the hall chattering and
laughing, glad to relax and find the living level again, but my kinswoman
made no effort to rise. The harpist slipped the green felt cover over his
instrument; the flute-players shook the water from their mouthpieces;
the men of the orchestra went out one by one, leaving the stage to the
chairs and music stands, empty as a winter cornfield.

I spoke to my aunt. She burst into tears and sobbed pleadingly. "I don't
want to go, Clark, I don't want to go!"

I understood. For her, just outside the concert hall, lay the black pond
with the cattle-tracked bluffs; the tall, unpainted house, with
weather-curled boards, naked as a tower; the crook-backed ash seedlings
where the dish-cloths hung to dry; the gaunt, moulting turkeys picking
up refuse about the kitchen door.




The Sculptor's Funeral




A group of the townspeople stood on the station siding of a little Kansas
town, awaiting the coming of the night train, which was already twenty
minutes overdue. The snow had fallen thick over everything; in the pale
starlight the line of bluffs across the wide, white meadows south of the
town made soft, smoke-coloured curves against the clear sky. The men
on the siding stood first on one foot and then on the other, their hands
thrust deep into their trousers pockets, their overcoats open, their
shoulders screwed up with the cold; and they glanced from time to time
toward the southeast, where the railroad track wound along the river
shore. They conversed in low tones and moved about restlessly,
seeming uncertain as to what was expected of them. There was but one of
the company who looked as if he knew exactly why he was there, and he
kept conspicuously apart; walking to the far end of the platform,
returning to the station door, then pacing up the track again, his chin
sunk in the high collar of his overcoat, his burly shoulders drooping
forward, his gait heavy and dogged. Presently he was approached by a
tall, spare, grizzled man clad in a faded Grand Army suit, who shuffled
out from the group and advanced with a certain deference, craning his
neck forward until his back made the angle of a jack-knife three-quarters
open.

"I reckon she's a-goin' to be pretty late agin to-night, Jim," he
remarked in a squeaky falsetto. "S'pose it's the snow ?"

"I don't know," responded the other man with a shade of annoyance,
speaking from out an astonishing cataract of red beard that grew fiercely
and thickly in all directions.

The spare man shifted the quill toothpick he was chewing to the other
side of his mouth. "It ain't likely that anybody from the East will come
with the corpse, I s'pose," he went on reflectively.

"I don't know," responded the other, more curtly than before.

"It's too bad he didn't belong to some lodge or other. I like an order
funeral myself. They seem more appropriate for people of some
repytation," the spare man continued, with an ingratiating concession in
his shrill voice, as he carefully placed his toothpick in his vest
pocket. He always carried the flag at the G.A.R. funerals in the town.

The heavy man turned on his heel, without replying, and walked up the
siding. The spare man rejoined the uneasy group. "Jim's ez full ez a
tick, ez ushel," he commented commiseratingly.

Just then a distant whistle sounded, and there was a shuffling of feet on
the platform. A number of lanky boys, of all ages, appeared as, suddenly
and slimily as eels wakened by the crack of thunder; some came from the
waiting-room, where they had been warming themselves by the red stove, or
half asleep on the slat benches; others uncoiled themselves from baggage
trucks or slid out of express wagons. Two clambered down from the
driver's seat of a hearse that stood backed up against the siding. They
straightened their stooping shoulders and lifted their heads, and a flash
of momentary animation kindled their dull eyes at that cold, vibrant
scream, the worldwide call for men. It stirred them like the note of a
trumpet; just as it had often stirred the man who was coming home
tonight, in his boyhood.

The night express shot, red as a rocket, from out the eastward marsh
lands and wound along the river shore under the long lines of shivering
poplars that sentinelled the meadows, the escaping steam hanging in grey
masses against the pale sky and blotting out the Milky Way. In a moment
the red glare from the headlight streamed up the snow-covered track
before the siding and glittered on the wet, black rails. The burly man
with the dishevelled red beard walked swiftly up the platform toward the
approaching train, uncovering his head as he went. The group of men
behind him hesitated, glanced questioningly at one another, and awkwardly
followed his example. The train stopped, and the crowd shuffled up to
the express car just as the door was thrown open, the man in the G.A.R.
suit thrusting his head forward with curiosity. The express messenger
appeared in the doorway, accompanied by a young man in a long ulster and
travelling cap.

"Are Mr. Merrick's friends here ?" inquired the young man.

The group on the platform swayed uneasily. Philip Phelps, the banker,
responded with dignity: "We have come to take charge of the body. Mr.
Merrick's father is very feeble and can't be about."

"Send the agent out here," growled the express messenger, "and tell the
operator to lend a hand."

The coffin was got out of its rough-box and down on the snowy platform.
The townspeople drew back enough to make room for it and then formed a
close semicircle about it, looking curiously at the palm leaf which lay
across the black cover. No one said anything. The baggage man stood by
his truck, waiting to get at the trunks. The engine panted heavily, and
the fireman dodged in and out among the wheels with his yellow torch and
long oil-can, snapping the spindle boxes. The young Bostonian, one of the
dead sculptor's pupils who had come with the body, looked about him
helplessly. He turned to the banker, the only one of that black, uneasy,
stoop-shouldered group who seemed enough of an individual to be
addressed.

"None of Mr. Merrick's brothers are here ?" he asked uncertainly.

The man with the red beard for the first time stepped up and joined the
others. "No, they have not come yet; the family is scattered. The body
will be taken directly to the house." He stooped and took hold of one of
the handles of the coffin.

"Take the long hill road up, Thompson, it will be easier on the horses,"
called the liveryman as the undertaker snapped the door of the hearse
and prepared to mount to the driver's seat.

Laird, the red-bearded lawyer, turned again to the stranger: "We didn't
know whether there would be any one with him or not," he explained. "It's
a long walk, so you'd better go up in the hack." He pointed to a single
battered conveyance, but the young man replied stiffly: "Thank you, but I
think I will go up with the hearse. If you don't object," turning to the
undertaker, "I'll ride with you."

They clambered up over the wheels and drove off in the starlight up the
long, white hill toward the town. The lamps in the still village were
shining from under the low, snow-burdened roofs; and beyond, on every
side, the plains reached out into emptiness, peaceful and wide as the
soft sky itself, and wrapped in a tangible, white silence.

When the hearse backed up to a wooden sidewalk before a naked,
weather-beaten frame house, the same composite, ill-defined group that
had stood upon the station siding was huddled about the gate. The front
yard was an icy swamp, and a couple of warped planks, extending from the
sidewalk to the door, made a sort of rickety footbridge. The gate hung on
one hinge, and was opened wide with difficulty. Steavens, the young
stranger, noticed that something black was tied to the knob of the front
door.

The grating sound made by the casket, as it was drawn from the hearse,
was answered by a scream from the house; the front door was wrenched
open, and a tall, corpulent woman rushed out bareheaded into the snow and
flung herself upon the coffin, shrieking: "My boy, my boy! And this is
how you've come home to me!"

As Steavens turned away and closed his eyes with a shudder of unutterable
repulsion, another woman, also tall, but flat and angular, dressed
entirely in black, darted out of the house and caught Mrs. Merrick by the
shoulders, crying sharply: "Come, come, mother; you mustn't go on like
this!" Her tone changed to one of obsequious solemnity as she turned to
the banker: "The parlour is ready, Mr. Phelps."

The bearers carried the coffin along the narrow boards, while the
undertaker ran ahead with the coffin-rests. They bore it into a large,
unheated room that smelled of dampness and disuse and furniture polish,
and set it down under a hanging lamp ornamented with jingling glass
prisms and before a "Rogers group" of John Alden and Priscilla, wreathed
with smilax. Henry Steavens stared about him with the sickening
conviction that there had been a mistake, and that he had somehow arrived
at the wrong destination. He looked at the clover-green Brussels, the fat
plush upholstery, among the hand-painted china placques and panels and
vases, for some mark of identification,--for something that might once
conceivably have belonged to Harvey Merrick. It was not until he
recognized his friend in the crayon portrait of a little boy in kilts
and curls, hanging above the piano, that he felt willing to let any of
these people approach the coffin.

"Take the lid off, Mr. Thompson; let me see my boy's face," wailed the
elder woman between her sobs. This time Steavens looked fearfully,
almost beseechingly into her face, red and swollen under its masses of
strong, black, shiny hair. He flushed, dropped his eyes, and then, almost
incredulously, looked again. There was a kind of power about her face--a
kind of brutal handsomeness, even; but it was scarred and furrowed by
violence, and so coloured and coarsened by fiercer passions that grief
seemed never to have laid a gentle finger there. The long nose was
distended and knobbed at the end, and there were deep lines on either
side of it; her heavy, black brows almost met across her forehead, her
teeth were large and square, and set far apart--teeth that could tear.
She filled the room; the men were obliterated, seemed tossed about like
twigs in an angry water, and even Steavens felt himself being drawn into
the whirlpool.

The daughter--the tall, raw-boned woman in crêpe, with a mourning comb in
her hair which curiously lengthened her long face--sat stiffly upon the
sofa, her hands, conspicuous for their large knuckles, folded in her lap,
her mouth and eyes drawn down, solemnly awaiting the opening of the
coffin. Near the door stood a mulatto woman, evidently a servant in the
house, with a timid bearing and an emaciated face pitifully sad and
gentle. She was weeping silently, the corner of her calico apron lifted
to her eyes, occasionally suppressing a long, quivering sob. Steavens
walked over and stood beside her.

Feeble steps were heard on the stairs, and an old man, tall and frail,
odorous of pipe smoke, with shaggy, unkept grey hair and a dingy beard,
tobacco stained about the mouth, entered uncertainly. He went slowly up
to the coffin and stood rolling a blue cotton handkerchief between his
hands, seeming so pained and embarrassed by his wife's orgy of grief that
he had no consciousness of anything else.

"There, there, Annie, dear, don't take on so," he quavered timidly,
putting out a shaking hand and awkwardly patting her elbow. She turned
and sank upon his shoulder with such violence that he tottered a little.
He did not even glance toward the coffin, but continued to look at her
with a dull, frightened, appealing expression, as a spaniel looks at the
whip. His sunken cheeks slowly reddened and burned with miserable shame.
When his wife rushed from the room, her daughter strode after her with
set lips. The servant stole up to the coffin, bent over it for a moment,
and then slipped away to the kitchen, leaving Steavens, the lawyer, and
the father to themselves. The old man stood looking down at his dead
son's face. The sculptor's splendid head seemed even more noble in its
rigid stillness than in life. The dark hair had crept down upon the wide
forehead; the face seemed strangely long, but in it there was not that
repose we expect to find in the faces of the dead. The brows were so
drawn that there were two deep lines above the beaked nose, and the chin
was thrust forward defiantly. It was as though the strain of life had
been so sharp and bitter that death could not at once relax the tension
and smooth the countenance into perfect peace--as though he were still
guarding something precious, which might even yet be wrested from him.

The old man's lips were working under his stained beard. He turned to the
lawyer with timid deference: "Phelps and the rest are comin' back to set
up with Harve, ain't they ?" he asked. "Thank'ee, Jim, thank'ee." He
brushed the hair back gently from his son's forehead. "He was a good boy,
Jim; always a good boy. He was ez gentle ez a child and the kindest of
'em all--only we didn't none of us ever onderstand him." The tears
trickled slowly down his beard and dropped upon the sculptor's coat.

"Martin, Martin! Oh, Martin! come here," his wife wailed from the top of
the stairs. The old man started timorously: "Yes, Annie, I'm coming." He
turned away, hesitated, stood for a moment in miserable indecision; then
reached back and patted the dead man's hair softly, and stumbled from the
room.

"Poor old man, I didn't think he had any tears left. Seems as if his eyes
would have gone dry long ago. At his age nothing cuts very deep,"
remarked the lawyer.

Something in his tone made Steavens glance up. While the mother had been
in the room, the young man had scarcely seen any one else; but now, from
the moment he first glanced into Jim Laird's florid face and blood-shot
eyes, he knew that he had found what he had been heartsick at not finding
before--the feeling, the understanding, that must exist in some one, even
here.

The man was red as his beard, with features swollen and blurred by
dissipation, and a hot, blazing blue eye. His face was strained--that
of a man who is controlling himself with difficulty--and he kept plucking
at his beard with a sort of fierce resentment. Steavens, sitting by the
window, watched him turn down the glaring lamp, still its jangling
pendants with an angry gesture, and then stand with his hands locked
behind him, staring down into the master's face. He could not help
wondering what link there had been between the porcelain vessel and so
sooty a lump of potter's clay.

From the kitchen an uproar was sounding; when the dining-room door
opened, the import of it was clear. The mother was abusing the maid for
having forgotten to make the dressing for the chicken salad which had
been prepared for the watchers. Steavens had never heard anything in
the least like it; it was injured, emotional, dramatic abuse, unique and
masterly in its excruciating cruelty, as violent and unrestrained as had
been her grief of twenty minutes before. With a shudder of disgust the
lawyer went into the dining-room and closed the door into the kitchen.

"Poor Roxy's getting it now," he remarked when he came back. "The
Merricks took her out of the poor-house years ago; and if her loyalty
would let her, I guess the poor old thing could tell tales that would
curdle your blood. She's the mulatto woman who was standing in here a
while ago, with her apron to her eyes. The old woman is a fury; there
never was anybody like her. She made Harvey's life a hell for him when
he lived at home; he was so sick ashamed of it. I never could see how he
kept himself sweet."

"He was wonderful," said Steavens slowly, "wonderful; but until tonight I
have never known how wonderful."

"That is the eternal wonder of it, anyway; that it can come even from
such a dung heap as this," the lawyer cried, with a sweeping gesture
which seemed to indicate much more than the four walls within which they
stood.

"I think I'll see whether I can get a little air. The room is so close I
am beginning to feel rather faint," murmured Steavens, struggling with
one of the windows. The sash was stuck, however, and would not yield, so
he sat down dejectedly and began pulling at his collar. The lawyer came
over, loosened the sash with one blow of his red fist and sent the window
up a few inches. Steavens thanked him, but the nausea which had been
gradually climbing into his throat for the last half hour left him with
but one desire--a desperate feeling that he must get away from this place
with what was left of Harvey Merrick. Oh, he comprehended well enough
now the quiet bitterness of the smile that he had seen so often on his
master's lips!

Once when Merrick returned from a visit home, he brought with him a
singularly feeling and suggestive bas-relief of a thin, faded old woman,
sitting and sewing something pinned to her knee; while a full-lipped,
full-blooded little urchin, his trousers held up by a single gallows,
stood beside her, impatiently twitching her gown to call her attention to
a butterfly he had caught. Steavens, impressed by the tender and delicate
modelling of the thin, tired face, had asked him if it were his mother.
He remembered the dull flush that had burned up in the sculptor's face.

The lawyer was sitting in a rocking-chair beside the coffin, his head
thrown back and his eyes closed. Steavens looked at him earnestly,
puzzled at the line of the chin, and wondering why a man should conceal a
feature of such distinction under that disfiguring shock of beard.
Suddenly, as though he felt the young sculptor's keen glance, Jim Laird
opened his eyes.

"Was he always a good deal of an oyster ?" he asked abruptly. "He was
terribly shy as a boy."

"Yes, he was an oyster, since you put it so," rejoined Stevens. "Although
he could be very fond of people, he always gave one the impression of
being detached. He disliked violent emotion; he was reflective, and
rather distrustful of himself--except, of course, as regarded his work.
He was sure enough there. He distrusted men pretty thoroughly and women
even more, yet somehow without believing ill of them. He was determined,
indeed, to believe the best; but he seemed afraid to investigate."

"A burnt dog dreads the fire," said the lawyer grimly, and closed his
eyes.

Steavens went on and on, reconstructing that whole miserable boyhood. All
this raw, biting ugliness had been the portion of the man whose mind was
to become an exhaustless gallery of beautiful impressions--so sensitive
that the mere shadow of a poplar leaf flickering against a sunny wall
would be etched and held there for ever. Surely, if ever a man had the
magic word in his finger tips, it was Merrick. Whatever he touched, he
revealed its holiest secret; liberated it from enchantment and restored
it to its pristine loveliness. Upon whatever he had come in contact with,
he had left a beautiful record of the experience--a sort of ethereal
signature; a scent, a sound, a colour that was his own.

Steavens understood now the real tragedy of his master's life; neither
love nor wine, as many had conjectured; but a blow which had fallen
earlier and cut deeper than anything else could have done--a shame not
his, and yet so unescapably his, to bide in his heart from his very
boyhood. And without--the frontier warfare; the yearning of a boy, cast
ashore upon a desert of newness and ugliness and sordidness, for all that
is chastened and old, and noble with traditions.

At eleven o'clock the tall, flat woman in black announced that the
watchers were arriving, and asked them to "step into the dining-room." As
Steavens rose, the lawyer said dryly: "You go on--it'll be a good
experience for you. I'm not equal to that crowd tonight; I've had twenty
years of them."

As Steavens closed the door after him he glanced back at the lawyer,
sitting by the coffin in the dim light, with his chin resting on his
hand.

The same misty group that had stood before the door of the express car
shuffled into the dining-room. In the light of the kerosene lamp they
separated and became individuals. The minister, a pale, feeble-looking
man with white hair and blond chin-whiskers, took his seat beside a small
side table and placed his Bible upon it. The Grand Army man sat down
behind the stove and tilted his chair back comfortably against the wall,
fishing his quill toothpick from his waistcoat pocket. The two bankers,
Phelps and Elder, sat off in a corner behind the dinner-table, where they
could finish their discussion of the new usury law and its effect on
chattel security loans. The real estate agent, an old man with a smiling,
hypocritical face, soon joined them. The coal and lumber dealer and the
cattle shipper sat on opposite sides of the hard coal-burner, their feet
on the nickel-work. Steavens took a book from his pocket and began to
read. The talk around him ranged through various topics of local interest
while the house was quieting down. When it was clear that the members of
the family were in bed, the Grand Army man hitched his shoulders and,
untangling his long legs, caught his heels on the rounds of his chair.

"S'pose there'll be a will, Phelps ?" he queried in his weak falsetto.

The banker laughed disagreeably, and began trimming his nails with a
pearl-handled pocket-knife.

"There'll scarcely be any need for one, will there ?" he queried in his
turn.

The restless Grand Army man shifted his position again, getting his knees
still nearer his chin. "Why, the ole man says Harve's done right well
lately," he chirped.

The other banker spoke up. "I reckon he means by that Harve ain't asked
him to mortgage any more farms lately, so as he could go on with his
education."

"Seems like my mind don't reach back to a time when Harve wasn't bein'
edycated," tittered the Grand Army man.

There was a general chuckle. The minister took out his handkerchief and
blew his nose sonorously. Banker Phelps closed his knife with a snap.
"It's too bad the old man's sons didn't turn out better," he remarked
with reflective authority. "They never hung together. He spent money
enough on Harve to stock a dozen cattle-farms, and he might as well have
poured it into Sand Creek. If Harve had stayed at home and helped nurse
what little they had, and gone into stock on the old man's bottom farm,
they might all have been well fixed. But the old man had to trust
everything to tenants and was cheated right and left."

"Harve never could have handled stock none," interposed the cattleman.
"He hadn't it in him to be sharp. Do you remember when he bought Sander's
mules for eight-year olds, when everybody in town knew that Sander's
father-in-law give 'em to his wife for a wedding present eighteen years
before, an' they was full-grown mules then ?"

The company laughed discreetly, and the Grand Army man rubbed his knees
with a spasm of childish delight.

"Harve never was much account for anything practical, and he shore was
never fond of work," began the coal and lumber dealer. "I mind the last
time he was home; the day he left, when the old man was out to the barn
helpin' his hand hitch up to take Harve to the train, and Cal Moots was
patchin' up the fence; Harve, he come out on the step and sings out, in
his lady-like voice: 'Cal Moots, Cal Moots! please come cord my trunk.'"

"That's Harve for you," approved the Grand Army man. "I kin hear him
howlin' yet, when he was a big feller in long pants and his mother used
to whale him with a rawhide in the barn for lettin' the cows git
foundered in the cornfield when he was drivin' 'em home from pasture. He
killed a cow of mine that-a-way onct--a pure Jersey and the best milker I
had, an' the ole man had to put up for her. Harve, he was watchin' the
sun set acrost the marshes when the anamile got away."

"Where the old man made his mistake was in sending the boy East to
school," said Phelps, stroking his goatee and speaking in a deliberate,
judicial tone. "There was where he got his head full of nonsense. What
Harve needed, of all people, was a course in some first-class Kansas
City business college."

The letters were swimming before Steavens's eyes. Was it possible that
these men did not understand, that the palm on the coffin meant nothing
to them ? The very name of their town would have remained for ever buried
in the postal guide had it not been now and again mentioned in the world
in connection with Harvey Merrick's. He remembered what his master had
said to him on the day of his death, after the congestion of both lungs
had shut off any probability of recovery, and the sculptor had asked his
pupil to send his body home. "It's not a pleasant place to be lying while
the world is moving and doing and bettering," he had said with a feeble
smile, "but it rather seems as though we ought to go back to the place we
came from, in the end. The townspeople will come in for a look at me; and
after they have had their say, I shan't have much to fear from the
judgment of God!"

The cattleman took up the comment. "Forty's young for a Merrick to cash
in; they usually hang on pretty well. Probably he helped it along with
whisky."

"His mother's people were not long lived, and Harvey never had a robust
constitution," said the minister mildly. He would have liked to say more.
He had been the boy's Sunday-school teacher, and had been fond of him;
but he felt that he was not in a position to speak. His own sons had
turned out badly, and it was not a year since one of them had made his
last trip home in the express car, shot in a gambling-house in the
Black Hills.

"Nevertheless, there is no disputin' that Harve frequently looked upon
the wine when it was red, also variegated, and it shore made an oncommon
fool of him," moralized the cattleman.

Just then the door leading into the parlour rattled loudly and every one
started involuntarily, looking relieved when only Jim Laird came out.
The Grand Army man ducked his head when he saw the spark in his blue,
blood-shot eye. They were all afraid of Jim; he was a drunkard, but he
could twist the law to suit his client's needs as no other man in all
western Kansas could do, and there were many who tried. The lawyer closed
the door behind him, leaned back against it and folded his arms, cocking
his head a little to one side. When he assumed this attitude in the
court-room, ears were always pricked up, as it usually foretold a flood
of withering sarcasm.

"I've been with you gentlemen before," he began in a dry, even tone,
"when you've sat by the coffins of boys born and raised in this town;
and, if I remember rightly, you were never any too well satisfied when
you checked them up. What's the matter, anyhow ? Why is it that reputable
young men are as scarce as millionaires in Sand City ? It might almost
seem to a stranger that there was some way something the matter with your
progressive town. Why did Ruben Sayer, the brightest young lawyer you
ever turned out, after he had come home from the university as straight
as a die, take to drinking and forge a check and shoot himself ? Why did
Bill Merrit's son die of the shakes in a saloon in Omaha ? Why was Mr.
Thomas's son, here, shot in a gambling-house ? Why did young Adams burn
his mill to beat the insurance companies and go to the pen ?"

The lawyer paused and unfolded his arms, laying one clenched fist quietly
on the table. "I'll tell you why. Because you drummed nothing but money
and knavery into their ears from the time they wore knickerbockers;
because you carped away at them as you've been carping here tonight,
holding our friends Phelps and Elder up to them for their models, as our
grandfathers held up George Washington and John Adams. But the boys were
young, and raw at the business you put them to, and how could they match
coppers with such artists as Phelps and Elder ? You wanted them to be
successful rascals; they were only unsuccessful ones--that's all the
difference. There was only one boy ever raised in this borderland between
ruffianism and civilization who didn't come to grief, and you hated
Harvey Merrick more for winning out than you hated all the other boys who
got under the wheels. Lord, Lord, how you did hate him! Phelps, here, is
fond of saying that he could buy and sell us all out any time he's a mind
to; but he knew Harve wouldn't have given a tinker's damn for his bank
and all his cattlefarms put together; and a lack of appreciation, that
way, goes hard with Phelps.

"Old Nimrod thinks Harve drank too much; and this from such as Nimrod and
me!

"Brother Elder says Harve was too free with the old man's money--fell
short in filial consideration, maybe. Well, we can all remember the
very tone in which brother Elder swore his own father was a liar, in the
county court; and we all know that the old man came out of that
partnership with his son as bare as a sheared lamb. But maybe I'm getting
personal, and I'd better be driving ahead at what I want to say."

The lawyer paused a moment, squared his heavy shoulders, and went on:
"Harvey Merrick and I went to school together, back East. We were dead in
earnest, and we wanted you all to be proud of us some day. We meant to be
great men. Even I, and I haven't lost my sense of humour, gentlemen, I
meant to be a great man. I came back here to practise, and I found you
didn't in the least want me to be a great man. You wanted me to be a
shrewd lawyer--oh, yes! Our veteran here wanted me to get him an increase
of pension, because he had dyspepsia; Phelps wanted a new county survey
that would put the widow Wilson's little bottom farm inside his south
line; Elder wanted to lend money at 5 per cent, a month, and get it
collected; and Stark here wanted to wheedle old women up in Vermont into
investing their annuities in real-estate mortgages that are not worth the
paper they are written on. Oh, you needed me hard enough, and you'll go
on needing me!

"Well, I came back here and became the damned shyster you wanted me to
be. You pretend to have some sort of respect for me; and yet you'll stand
up and throw mud at Harvey Merrick, whose soul you couldn't dirty and
whose hands you couldn't tie. Oh, you're a discriminating lot of
Christians! There have been times when the sight of Harvey's name in some
Eastern paper has made me hang my head like a whipped dog; and, again,
times when I liked to think of him off there in the world, away from all
this hog-wallow, climbing the big, clean up-grade he'd set for himself.

"And we ? Now that we've fought and lied and sweated and stolen, and hated
as only the disappointed strugglers in a bitter, dead little Western town
know how to do, what have we got to show for it ? Harvey Merrick wouldn't
have given one sunset over your marshes for all you've got put together,
and you know it. It's not for me to say why, in the inscrutable wisdom of
God, a genius should ever have been called from this place of hatred and
bitter waters; but I want this Boston man to know that the drivel he's
been hearing here tonight is the only tribute any truly great man could
have from such a lot of sick, side-tracked, burnt-dog, land-poor sharks
as the here-present financiers of Sand City--upon which town may God have
mercy!"

The lawyer thrust out his hand to Steavens as he passed him, caught up
his overcoat in the hall, and had left the house before the Grand Army
man had had time to lift his ducked head and crane his long neck about at
his fellows.

Next day Jim Laird was drunk and unable to attend the funeral services.
Steavens called twice at his office, but was compelled to start East
without seeing him. He had a presentiment that he would hear from him
again, and left his address on the lawyer's table; but if Laird found it,
he never acknowledged it. The thing in him that Harvey Merrick had loved
must have gone under ground with Harvey Merrick's coffin; for it never
spoke again, and Jim got the cold he died of driving across the Colorado
mountains to defend one of Phelps's sons who had got into trouble out
there by cutting government timber.




"A Death in the Desert"




Everett Hilgarde was conscious that the man in the seat across the aisle
was looking at him intently. He was a large, florid man, wore a
conspicuous diamond solitaire upon his third finger, and Everett judged
him to be a travelling salesman of some sort. He had the air of an
adaptable fellow who had been about the world and who could keep cool and
clean under almost any circumstances.

The "High Line Flyer," as this train was derisively called among railroad
men, was jerking along through the hot afternoon over the monotonous
country between Holdredge and Cheyenne. Besides the blond man and himself
the only occupants of the car were two dusty, bedraggled-looking girls
who had been to the Exposition at Chicago, and who were earnestly
discussing the cost of their first trip out of Colorado. The four
uncomfortable passengers were covered with a sediment of fine, yellow
dust which clung to their hair and eyebrows like gold powder. It blew up
in clouds from the bleak, lifeless country through which they passed,
until they were one colour with the sage-brush and sand-hills. The grey
and yellow desert was varied only by occasional ruins of deserted towns,
and the little red boxes of station-houses, where the spindling trees
and sickly vines in the blue-grass yards made little green reserves
fenced off in that confusing wilderness of sand.

As the slanting rays of the sun beat in stronger and stronger through the
car-windows, the blond gentleman asked the ladies' permission to remove
his coat, and sat in his lavender striped shirtsleeves, with a black silk
handkerchief tucked about his collar. He had seemed interested in
Everett since they had boarded the train at Holdredge; kept glancing at
him curiously and then looking reflectively out of the window, as though
he were trying to recall something. But wherever Everett went, some one
was almost sure to look at him with that curious interest, and it had
ceased to embarrass or annoy him. Presently the stranger, seeming
satisfied with his observation, leaned back in his seat, half closed his
eyes, and began softly to whistle the Spring Song from _Proserpine_, the
cantata that a dozen years before had made its young composer famous in a
night. Everett had heard that air on guitars in Old Mexico, on mandolins
at college glees, on cottage organs in New England hamlets, and only
two weeks ago he had heard it played on sleigh-bells at a variety theatre
in Denver. There was literally no way of escaping his brother's
precocity. Adriance could live on the other side of the Atlantic, where
his youthful indiscretions were forgotten in his mature achievements, but
his brother had never been able to outrun _Proserpine_,--and here he
found it again, in the Colorado sand-hills. Not that Everett was exactly
ashamed of _Proserpine_; only a man of genius could have written it, but
it was the sort of thing that a man of genius outgrows as soon as he can.

Everett unbent a trifle, and smiled at his neighbour across the aisle.
Immediately the large man rose and coming over dropped into the seat
facing Hilgarde, extending his card.

"Dusty ride, isn't it ? I don't mind it myself; I'm used to it. Born and
bred in de briar patch, like Br'er Rabbit. I've been trying to place you
for a long time; I think I must have met you before."

"Thank you," said Everett, taking the card; "my name is Hilgarde. You've
probably met my brother, Adriance; people often mistake me for him."

The travelling-man brought his hand down upon his knee with such
vehemence that the solitaire blazed.

"So I was right after all, and if you're not Adriance Hilgarde you're his
double. I thought I couldn't be mistaken. Seen him ? Well, I guess! I
never missed one of his recitals at the Auditorium, and he played the
piano score of _Proserpine_ through to us once at the Chicago Press Club.
I used to be on the _Commercial_ there before I began to travel for the
publishing department of the concern. So you're Hilgarde's brother, and
here I've run into you at the jumping-off place. Sounds like a newspaper
yarn, doesn't it ?"

The travelling-man laughed and offering Everett a cigar plied him with
questions on the only subject that people ever seemed to care to talk
to him about. At length the salesman and the two girls alighted at a
Colorado way station, and Everett went on to Cheyenne alone.

The train pulled into Cheyenne at nine o'clock, late by a matter of four
hours or so; but no one seemed particularly concerned at its tardiness
except the station agent, who grumbled at being kept in the office over
time on a summer night. When Everett alighted from the train he walked
down the platform and stopped at the track crossing, uncertain as to what
direction he should take to reach a hotel. A phaeton stood near the
crossing and a woman held the reins. She was dressed in white, and her
figure was clearly silhouetted against the cushions, though it was too
dark to see her face. Everett had scarcely noticed her, when the
switch-engine came puffing up from the opposite direction, and the
head-light threw a strong glare of light on his face. The woman in the
phaeton uttered a low cry and dropped the reins. Everett started forward
and caught the horse's head, but the animal only lifted its ears and
whisked its tail in impatient surprise. The woman sat perfectly still,
her head sunk between her shoulders and her handkerchief pressed to her
face. Another woman came out of the depot and hurried toward the phaeton,
crying, "Katharine, dear, what is the matter ?"

Everett hesitated a moment in painful embarrassment, then lifted his hat
and passed on. He was accustomed to sudden recognitions in the most
impossible places, especially from women.

While he was breakfasting the next morning, the head waiter leaned over
his chair to murmur that there was a gentleman waiting to see him in the
parlour. Everett finished his coffee, and went in the direction
indicated, where he found his visitor restlessly pacing the floor. His
whole manner betrayed a high degree of agitation, though his physique was
not that of a man whose nerves lie near the surface. He was something
below medium height, square-shouldered and solidly built. His thick,
closely cut hair was beginning to show grey about the ears, and his
bronzed face was heavily lined. His square brown hands were locked behind
him, and he held his shoulders like a man conscious of responsibilities,
yet, as he turned to greet Everett, there was an incongruous diffidence
in his address.

"Good-morning, Mr. Hilgarde," he said, extending his hand; "I found your
name on the hotel register. My name is Gaylord. I'm afraid my sister
startled you at the station last night, and I've come around to explain."

"Ah! the young lady in the phaeton ? I'm sure I didn't know whether I had
anything to do with her alarm or not. If I did, it is I who owe an
apology."

The man coloured a little under the dark brown of his face.

"Oh, it's nothing you could help, sir, I fully understand that. You see,
my sister used to be a pupil of your brother's, and it seems you favour
him; when the switch-engine threw a light on your face, it startled her."

Everett wheeled about in his chair. "Oh! _Katharine_ Gaylord! Is it
possible! Why, I used to know her when I was a boy. What on
earth--"

"Is she doing here ?" Gaylord grimly filled out the pause. "You've got at
the heart of the matter. You know my sister had been in bad health for a
long time ?"

"No. The last I knew of her she was singing in London. My brother and I
correspond infrequently, and seldom get beyond family matters. I am
deeply sorry to hear this."

The lines in Charley Gaylord's brow relaxed a little.

"What I'm trying to say, Mr. Hilgarde, is that she wants to see you.
She's set on it. We live several miles out of town, but my rig's below,
and I can take you out any time you can go."

"At once, then. I'll get my hat and be with you in a moment."

When he came downstairs Everett found a cart at the door, and Charley
Gaylord drew a long sigh of relief as he gathered up the reins and
settled back into his own element.

"I think I'd better tell you something about my sister before you see
her, and I don't know just where to begin. She travelled in Europe with
your brother and his wife, and sang at a lot of his concerts; but I don't
know just how much you know about her."

"Very little, except that my brother always thought her the most gifted
of his pupils. When I knew her she was very young and very beautiful,
and quite turned my head for a while."

Everett saw that Gaylord's mind was entirely taken up by his grief.
"That's the whole thing," he went on, flecking his horses with the whip.

"She was a great woman, as you say, and she didn't come of a great
family. She had to fight her own way from the first. She got to Chicago,
and then to New York, and then to Europe, and got a taste for it all; and
now she's dying here like a rat in a hole, out of her own world, and she
can't fall back into ours. We've grown apart, some way--miles and miles
apart--and I'm afraid she's fearfully unhappy."

"It's a tragic story you're telling me, Gaylord," said Everett. They were
well out into the country now, spinning along over the dusty plains of
red grass, with the ragged blue outline of the mountains before them.

"Tragic!" cried Gaylord, starting up in his seat, "my God, nobody will
ever know how tragic! It's a tragedy I live with and eat with and sleep
with, until I've lost my grip on everything. You see she had made a good
bit of money, but she spent it all going to health resorts. It's her
lungs. I've got money enough to send her anywhere, but the doctors all
say it's no use. She hasn't the ghost of a chance. It's just getting
through the days now. I had no notion she was half so bad before she came
to me. She just wrote that she was run down. Now that she's here, I think
she'd be happier anywhere under the sun, but she won't leave. She says
it's easier to let go of life here. There was a time when I
was a brakeman with a run out of Bird City, Iowa, and she was a little
thing I could carry on my shoulder, when I could get her everything on
earth she wanted, and she hadn't a wish my $80 a month didn't cover; and
now, when I've got a little property together, I can't buy her a night's
sleep!"

Everett saw that, whatever Charley Gaylord's present status in the world
might be, he had brought the brakeman's heart up the ladder with him.

The reins slackened in Gaylord's hand as they drew up before a showily
painted house with many gables and a round tower. "Here we are," he said,
turning to Everett, "and I guess we understand each other."

They were met at the door by a thin, colourless woman, whom Gaylord
introduced as "My sister, Maggie." She asked her brother to show Mr.
Hilgarde into the music-room, where Katharine would join him.

When Everett entered the music-room he gave a little start of surprise,
feeling that he had stepped from the glaring Wyoming sunlight into some
New York studio that he had always known. He looked incredulously out of
the window at the grey plain that ended in the great upheaval of the
Rockies.

The haunting air of familiarity perplexed him. Suddenly his eye fell upon
a large photograph of his brother above the piano. Then it all became
clear enough: this was veritably his brother's room. If it were not an
exact copy of one of the many studios that Adriance had fitted up in
various parts of the world, wearying of them and leaving almost before
the renovator's varnish had dried, it was at least in the same tone. In
every detail Adriance's taste was so manifest that the room seemed to
exhale his personality.

Among the photographs on the wall there was one of Katharine Gaylord,
taken in the days when Everett had known her, and when the flash of her
eye or the flutter of her skirt was enough to set his boyish heart in a
tumult. Even now, he stood before the portrait with a certain degree of
embarrassment. It was the face of a woman already old in her first youth,
a trifle hard, and it told of what her brother had called her fight. The
_camaraderie_ of her frank, confident eyes was qualified by the deep
lines about her mouth and the curve of the lips, which was both sad and
cynical. Certainly she had more good-will than confidence toward the
world. The chief charm of the woman, as Everett had known her, lay in
her superb figure and in her eyes, which possessed a warm, life-giving
quality like the sunlight; eyes which glowed with a perpetual _salutat_
to the world.

Everett was still standing before the picture, his hands behind him and
his head inclined, when he heard the door open. A tall woman advanced
toward him, holding out her hand. As she started to speak she coughed
slightly, then, laughing, said, in a low, rich voice, a trifle husky:
"You see I make the traditional Camille entrance. How good of you to
come, Mr. Hilgarde."

Everett was acutely conscious that while addressing him she was not
looking at him at all, and, as he assured her of his pleasure in coming,
he was glad to have an opportunity to collect himself. He had not
reckoned upon the ravages of a long illness. The long, loose folds of her
white gown had been especially designed to conceal the sharp outlines of
her body, but the stamp of her disease was there; simple and ugly and
obtrusive, a pitiless fact that could not be disguised or evaded. The
splendid shoulders were stooped, there was a swaying unevenness in her
gait, her arms seemed disproportionately long, and her hands were
transparently white, and cold to the touch. The changes in her face were
less obvious; the proud carriage of the head, the warm, clear eyes, even
the delicate flush of colour in her cheeks, all defiantly remained,
though they were all in a lower key--older, sadder, softer.

She sat down upon the divan and began nervously to arrange the pillows.
"Of course I'm ill, and I look it, but you must be quite frank and
sensible about that and get used to it at once, for we've no time to
lose. And if I'm a trifle irritable you won't mind ?--for I'm more than
usually nervous."

"Don't bother with me this morning, if you are tired," urged Everett. "I
can come quite as well tomorrow."

"Gracious, no!" she protested, with a flash of that quick, keen humour
that he remembered as a part of her. "It's solitude that I'm tired to
death of--solitude and the wrong kind of people. You see, the minister
called on me this morning. He happened to be riding by on his bicycle and
felt it his duty to stop. The funniest feature of his conversation is
that he is always excusing my own profession to me. But how we are losing
time! Do tell me about New York; Charley says you're just on from there.
How does it look and taste and smell just now ? I think a whiff of the
Jersey ferry would be as flagons of cod-liver oil to me. Are the trees
still green in Madison Square, or have they grown brown and dusty ? Does
the chaste Diana still keep her vows through all the exasperating changes
of weather ? Who has your brother's old studio now, and what misguided
aspirants practise their scales in the rookeries about Carnegie Hall ?
What do people go to see at the theatres, and what do they eat and drink
in the world nowadays ? Oh, let me die in Harlem!" she was interrupted by
a violent attack of coughing, and Everett, embarrassed by her discomfort,
plunged into gossip about the professional people he had met in town
during the summer, and the musical outlook for the winter. He was
diagramming with his pencil some new mechanical device to be used at the
Metropolitan in the production of the _Rheingold_, when he became
conscious that she was looking at him intently, and that he was talking
to the four walls.

Katharine was lying back among the pillows, watching him through
half-closed eyes, as a painter looks at a picture. He finished his
explanation vaguely enough and put the pencil back in his pocket. As he
did so, she said, quietly: "How wonderfully like Adriance you are!"

He laughed, looking up at her with a touch of pride in his eyes that made
them seem quite boyish. "Yes, isn't it absurd ? It's almost as awkward
as looking like Napoleon--But, after all, there are some advantages. It
has made some of his friends like me, and I hope it will make you."

Katharine gave him a quick, meaning glance from under her lashes. "Oh, it
did that long ago. What a haughty, reserved youth you were then, and how
you used to stare at people, and then blush and look cross. Do you
remember that night you took me home from a rehearsal, and scarcely spoke
a word to me ?"

"It was the silence of admiration," protested Everett, "very crude and
boyish, but certainly sincere. Perhaps you suspected something of the
sort ?"

"I believe I suspected a pose; the one that boys often affect with
singers. But it rather surprised me in you, for you must have seen a good
deal of your brother's pupils." Everett shook his head. "I saw my
brother's pupils come and go. Sometimes I was called on to play
accompaniments, or to fill out a vacancy at a rehearsal, or to order a
carriage for an infuriated soprano who had thrown up her part. But they
never spent any time on me, unless it was to notice the resemblance
you speak of."

"Yes," observed Katharine, thoughtfully, "I noticed it then, too; but it
has grown as you have grown older. That is rather strange, when you have
lived such different lives. It's not merely an ordinary family likeness
of features, you know, but the suggestion of the other man's personality
in your face--like an air transposed to another key. But I'm not
attempting to define it; it's beyond me; something altogether unusual and
a trifle--well, uncanny," she finished, laughing.

Everett sat looking out under the red window-blind which was raised just
a little. As it swung back and forth in the wind it revealed the glaring
panorama of the desert--a blinding stretch of yellow, flat as the sea in
dead calm, splotched here and there with deep purple shadows; and,
beyond, the ragged blue outline of the mountains and the peaks of snow,
white as the white clouds. "I remember, when I was a child I used to be
very sensitive about it. I don't think it exactly displeased me, or that
I would have had it otherwise, but it seemed like a birthmark, or
something not to be lightly spoken of. It came into even my relations
with my mother. Ad went abroad to study when he was very young, and
mother was all broken up over it. She did her whole duty by each of
us, but it was generally understood among us that she'd have made
burnt-offerings of us all for him any day. I was a little fellow then,
and when she sat alone on the porch on summer evenings, she used
sometimes to call me to her and turn my face up in the light that
streamed out through the shutters and kiss me, and then I always knew she
was thinking of Adriance."

"Poor little chap," said Katharine, in her husky voice. "How fond people
have always been of Adriance! Tell me the latest news of him. I haven't
heard, except through the press, for a year or more. He was in Algiers
then, in the valley of the Chelif, riding horseback, and he had quite
made up his mind to adopt the Mahometan faith and become an Arab. How
many countries and faiths has he adopted, I wonder ?"

"Oh, that's Adriance," chuckled Everett. "He is himself barely long
enough to write checks and be measured for his clothes. I didn't hear
from him while he was an Arab; I missed that."

"He was writing an Algerian _suite_ for the piano then; it must be in the
publisher's hands by this time. I have been too ill to answer his letter,
and have lost touch with him."

Everett drew an envelope from his pocket. "This came a month ago. Read it
at your leisure."

"Thanks. I shall keep it as a hostage. Now I want you to play for me.
Whatever you like; but if there is anything new in the world, in mercy
let me hear it."

He sat down at the piano, and Katharine sat near him, absorbed in his
remarkable physical likeness to his brother, and trying to discover in
just what it consisted. He was of a larger build than Adriance, and much
heavier. His face was of the same oval mould, but it was grey, and
darkened about the mouth by continual shaving. His eyes were of the same
inconstant April colour, but they were reflective and rather dull; while
Adriance's were always points of high light, and always meaning another
thing than the thing they meant yesterday. It was hard to see why this
earnest man should so continually suggest that lyric, youthful face, as
gay as his was grave. For Adriance, though he was ten years the elder,
and though his hair was streaked with silver, had the face of a boy of
twenty, so mobile that it told his thoughts before he could put them into
words. A contralto, famous for the extravagance of her vocal methods and
of her affections, once said that the shepherd-boys who sang in the Vale
of Tempe must certainly have looked like young Hilgarde.

Everett sat smoking on the veranda of the Inter-Ocean House that night,
the victim of mournful recollections. His infatuation for Katharine
Gaylord, visionary as it was, had been the most serious of his boyish
love-affairs. The fact that it was all so done and dead and far behind
him, and that the woman had lived her life out since then, gave him an
oppressive sense of age and loss.

He remembered how bitter and morose he had grown during his stay at his
brother's studio when Katharine Gaylord was working there, and how he had
wounded Adriance on the night of his last concert in New York. He had sat
there in the box--while his brother and Katherine were called back again
and again, and the flowers went up over the footlights until they were
stacked half as high as the piano--brooding in his sullen boy's heart
upon the pride those two felt in each other's work--spurring each other
to their best and beautifully contending in song. The footlights had
seemed a hard, glittering line drawn sharply between their life and his.
He walked back to his hotel alone, and sat in his window staring out on
Madison Square until long after midnight, resolved to beat no more at
doors that he could never enter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everett's week in Cheyenne stretched to three, and he saw no prospect of
release except through the thing he dreaded. The bright, windy days of
the Wyoming autumn passed swiftly. Letters and telegrams came urging him
to hasten his trip to the coast, but he resolutely postponed his business
engagements. The mornings he spent on one of Charley Gaylord's ponies, or
fishing in the mountains. In the afternoon he was usually at his post of
duty. Destiny, he reflected, seems to have very positive notions about
the sort of parts we are fitted to play. The scene changes and the
compensation varies, but in the end we usually find that we have played
the same class of business from first to last. Everett had been a
stop-gap all his life. He remembered going through a looking-glass
labyrinth when he was a boy, and trying gallery after gallery, only at
every turn to bump his nose against his own face--which, indeed, was not
his own, but his brother's. No matter what his mission, east or west, by
land or sea, he was sure to find himself employed in his brother's
business, one of the tributary lives which helped to swell the shining
current of Adriance Hilgarde's. It was not the first time that his duty
had been to comfort, as best he could, one of the broken things his
brother's imperious speed had cast aside and forgotten. He made no
attempt to analyse the situation or to state it in exact terms; but he
accepted it as a commission from his brother to help this woman to die.
Day by day he felt her need for him grow more acute and positive; and day
by day he felt that in his peculiar relation to her, his own
individuality played a smaller part. His power to minister to her comfort
lay solely in his link with his brother's life. He knew that she sat by
him always watching for some trick of gesture, some familiar play of
expression, some illusion of light and shadow, in which he should seem
wholly Adriance. He knew that she lived upon this, and that in the
exhaustion which followed this turmoil of her dying senses, she slept
deep and sweet, and dreamed of youth and art and days in a certain old
Florentine garden, and not of bitterness and death.

A few days after his first meeting with Katharine Gaylord, he had cabled
his brother to write her. He merely said that she was mortally ill;
he could depend on Adriance to say the right thing--that was a part of
his gift. Adriance always said not only the right thing, but the
opportune, graceful, exquisite thing. He caught the lyric essence of the
moment, the poetic suggestion of every situation. Moreover, he usually
did the right thing,--except, when he did very cruel things--bent upon
making people happy when their existence touched his, just as he insisted
that his material environment should be beautiful; lavishing upon those
near him all the warmth and radiance of his rich nature, all the homage
of the poet and troubadour, and, when they were no longer near,
forgetting--for that also was a part of Adriance's gift.

Three weeks after Everett had sent his cable, when he made his daily call
at the gaily painted ranch-house, he found Katharine laughing like a
girl. "Have you ever thought," she said, as he entered the music-room,
"how much these séances of ours are like Heine's 'Florentine Nights,'
except that I don't give you an opportunity to monopolize the
conversation ?" She held his hand longer than usual as she greeted him.
"You are the kindest man living, the kindest," she added, softly.

Everett's grey face coloured faintly as he drew his hand away, for he
felt that this time she was looking at him, and not at a whimsical
caricature of his brother.

She drew a letter with a foreign postmark from between the leaves of a
book and held it out, smiling. "You got him to write it. Don't say you
didn't, for it came direct, you see, and the last address I gave him was
a place in Florida. This deed shall be remembered of you when I am with
the just in Paradise. But one thing you did not ask him to do, for you
didn't know about it. He has sent me his latest work, the new sonata, and
you are to play it for me directly. But first for the letter; I think you
would better read it aloud to me."

Everett sat down in a low chair facing the window-seat in which she
reclined with a barricade of pillows behind her. He opened the letter,
his lashes half-veiling his kind eyes, and saw to his satisfaction that
it was a long one; wonderfully tactful and tender, even for Adriance, who
was tender with his valet and his stable-boy, with his old gondolier and
the beggar-women who prayed to the saints for him.

The letter was from Granada, written in the Alhambra, as he sat by the
fountain of the Patio di Lindaraxa. The air was heavy with the warm
fragrance of the South and full of the sound of splashing, running water,
as it had been in a certain old garden in Florence, long ago. The sky
was one great turquoise, heated until it glowed. The wonderful Moorish
arches threw graceful blue shadows all about him. He had sketched an
outline of them on the margin of his note-paper. The letter was full of
confidences about his work, and delicate allusions to their old happy
days of study and comradeship.

As Everett folded it he felt that Adriance had divined the thing needed
and had risen to it in his own wonderful way. The letter was consistently
egotistical, and seemed to him even a trifle patronizing, yet it was just
what she had wanted. A strong realization of his brother's charm and
intensity and power came over him; he felt the breath of that whirlwind
of flame in which Adriance passed, consuming all in his path, and himself
even more resolutely than he consumed others. Then he looked down at this
white, burnt-out brand that lay before him.

"Like him, isn't it ?" she said, quietly. "I think I can scarcely answer
his letter, but when you see him next you can do that for me. I want
you to tell him many things for me, yet they can all be summed up in
this: I want him to grow wholly into his best and greatest self, even at
the cost of what is half his charm to you and me. Do you understand me ?"

"I know perfectly well what you mean," answered Everett, thoughtfully.
"And yet it's difficult to prescribe for those fellows; so little makes,
so little mars."

Katharine raised herself upon her elbow, and her face flushed with
feverish earnestness. "Ah, but it is the waste of himself that I mean;
his lashing himself out on stupid and uncomprehending people until they
take him at their own estimate."

"Come, come," expostulated Everett, now alarmed at her excitement. "Where
is the new sonata ? Let him speak for himself."

He sat down at the piano and began playing the first movement, which was
indeed the voice of Adriance, his proper speech. The sonata was the most
ambitious work he had done up to that time, and marked the transition
from his early lyric vein to a deeper and nobler style. Everett played
intelligently and with that sympathetic comprehension which seems
peculiar to a certain lovable class of men who never accomplish anything
in particular. When he had finished he turned to Katharine.

"How he has grown!" she cried. "What the three last years have done for
him! He used to write only the tragedies of passion; but this is the
tragedy of effort and failure, the thing Keats called hell. This is my
tragedy, as I lie here, listening to the feet of the runners as they pass
me--ah, God! the swift feet of the runners!"

She turned her face away and covered it with her hands. Everett crossed
over to her and knelt beside her. In all the days he had known her she
had never before, beyond an occasional ironical jest, given voice to the
bitterness of her own defeat. Her courage had become a point of pride
with him.

"Don't do it," he gasped. "I can't stand it, I really can't, I feel it
too much."

When she turned her face back to him there was a ghost of the old, brave,
cynical smile on it, more bitter than the tears she could not shed. "No,
I won't; I will save that for the night, when I have no better company.
Run over that theme at the beginning again, will you ? It was running in
his head when we were in Venice years ago, and he used to drum it on his
glass at the dinner-table. He had just begun to work it out when the late
autumn came on, and he decided to go to Florence for the winter. He lost
touch with his idea, I suppose, during his illness. Do you remember those
frightful days ? All the people who have loved him are not strong enough
to save him from himself! When I got word from Florence that he had been
ill, I was singing at Monte Carlo. His wife was hurrying to him from
Paris, but I reached him first. I arrived at dusk, in a terrific storm.
They had taken an old palace there for the winter, and I found him in the
library--a long, dark room full of old Latin books and heavy furniture
and bronzes. He was sitting by a wood fire at one end of the room,
looking, oh, so worn and pale!--as he always does when he is ill, you
know. Ah, it is so good that you _do_ know! Even his red smoking-jacket
lent no colour to his face. His first words were not to tell me how ill
he had been, but that that morning he had been well enough to put the
last strokes to the score of his _'Souvenirs d' Automne,'_ and he was as
I most like to remember him; calm and happy, and tired with that heavenly
tiredness that comes after a good work done at last. Outside, the rain
poured down in torrents, and the wind moaned and sobbed in the garden
and about the walls of that desolated old palace. How that night comes
back to me! There were no lights in the room, only the wood fire. It
glowed on the black walls and floor like the reflection of purgatorial
flame. Beyond us it scarcely penetrated the gloom at all. Adriance
sat staring at the fire with the weariness of all his life in his eyes,
and of all the other lives that must aspire and suffer to make up one
such life as his. Somehow the wind with all its world-pain had got into
the room, and the cold rain was in our eyes, and the wave came up in both
of us at once--that awful vague, universal pain, that cold fear of life
and death and God and hope--and we were like two clinging together on a
spar in mid-ocean after the shipwreck of everything. Then we heard the
front door open with a great gust of wind that shook even the walls, and
the servants came running with lights, announcing that Madame had
returned, '_and in the book we read no more that night_.'"

She gave the old line with a certain bitter humour, and with the hard,
bright smile in which of old she had wrapped her weakness as in a
glittering garment. That ironical smile, worn through so many years, had
gradually changed the lines of her face, and when she looked in the
mirror she saw not herself, but the scathing critic, the amused observer
and satirist of herself.

Everett dropped his head upon his hand. "How much you have cared!" he
said.

"Ah, yes, I cared," she replied, closing her eyes. "You can't imagine
what a comfort it is to have you know how I cared, what a relief it is to
be able to tell it to some one."

Everett continued to look helplessly at the floor. "I was not sure how
much you wanted me to know," he said.

"Oh, I intended you should know from the first time I looked into your
face, when you came that day with Charley. You are so like him, that it
is almost like telling him himself. At least, I feel now that he will
know some day, and then I will be quite sacred from his compassion."

"And has he never known at all ?" asked Everett, in a thick voice.

"Oh! never at all in the way that you mean. Of course, he is accustomed
to looking into the eyes of women and finding love there; when he doesn't
find it there he thinks he must have been guilty of some discourtesy. He
has a genuine fondness for every woman who is not stupid or gloomy, or
old or preternaturally ugly. I shared with the rest; shared the smiles
and the gallantries and the droll little sermons. It was quite like a
Sunday-school picnic; we wore our best clothes and a smile and took our
turns. It was his kindness that was hardest."

"Don't; you'll make me hate him," groaned Everett.

Katherine laughed and began to play nervously with her fan. "It wasn't in
the slightest degree his fault; that is the most grotesque part of it.
Why, it had really begun before I ever met him. I fought my way to him,
and I drank my doom greedily enough."

Everett rose and stood hesitating. "I think I must go. You ought to be
quiet, and I don't think I can hear any more just now."

She put out her hand and took his playfully.

"You've put in three weeks at this sort of thing, haven't you ? Well, it
ought to square accounts for a much worse life than yours will ever be."

He knelt beside her, saying, brokenly: "I stayed because I wanted to be
with you, that's all. I have never cared about other women since I
knew you in New York when I was a lad. You are a part of my destiny, and
I could not leave you if I would."

She put her hands on his shoulders and shook her head. "No, no; don't
tell me that. I have seen enough tragedy. It was only a boy's fancy,
and your divine pity and my utter pitiableness have recalled it for a
moment. One does not love the dying, dear friend. Now go, and you will
come again tomorrow, as long as there are tomorrows." She took his hand
with a smile that was both courage and despair, and full of infinite
loyalty and tenderness, as she said softly:

_"For ever and for ever, farewell, Cassius;
If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
If not, why then, this parting was well made."_

The courage in her eyes was like the clear light of a star to him as he
went out.

On the night of Adriance Hilgarde's opening concert in Paris, Everett sat
by the bed in the ranch-house in Wyoming, watching over the last battle
that we have with the flesh before we are done with it and free of it for
ever. At times it seemed that the serene soul of her must have left
already and found some refuge from the storm, and only the tenacious
animal life were left to do battle with death. She laboured under a
delusion at once pitiful and merciful, thinking that she was in the
Pullman on her way to New York, going back to her life and her work. When
she roused from her stupor, it was only to ask the porter to waken her
half an hour out of Jersey City, or to remonstrate about the delays and
the roughness of the road. At midnight Everett and the nurse were left
alone with her. Poor Charley Gaylord had lain down on a couch outside the
door. Everett sat looking at the sputtering night-lamp until it made his
eyes ache. His head dropped forward, and he sank into heavy, distressful
slumber. He was dreaming of Adriance's concert in Paris, and of
Adriance, the troubadour. He heard the applause and he saw the flowers
going up over the footlights until they were stacked half as high as the
piano, and the petals fell and scattered, making crimson splotches on the
floor. Down this crimson pathway came Adriance with his youthful step,
leading his singer by the hand; a dark woman this time, with Spanish
eyes.

The nurse touched him on the shoulder, he started and awoke. She screened
the lamp with her hand. Everett saw that Katharine was awake and
conscious, and struggling a little. He lifted her gently on his arm and
began to fan her. She looked into his face with eyes that seemed never to
have wept or doubted. "Ah, dear Adriance, dear, dear!" she whispered.

Everett went to call her brother, but when they came back the madness of
art was over for Katharine.

Two days later Everett was pacing the station siding, waiting for the
west-bound train. Charley Gaylord walked beside him, but the two men had
nothing to say to each other. Everett's bags were piled on the truck, and
his step was hurried and his eyes were full of impatience, as he gazed
again and again up the track, watching for the train. Gaylord's
impatience was not less than his own; these two, who had grown so close,
had now become painful and impossible to each other, and longed for the
wrench of farewell.

As the train pulled in, Everett wrung Gaylord's hand among the crowd of
alighting passengers. The people of a German opera company, _en route_
for the coast, rushed by them in frantic haste to snatch their breakfast
during the stop. Everett heard an exclamation, and a stout woman rushed
up to him, glowing with joyful surprise and caught his coat-sleeve with
her tightly gloved hands.

"_Herr Gott_, Adriance, _lieber Freund_," she cried.

Everett lifted his hat, blushing. "Pardon me, madame, I see that you have
mistaken me for Adriance Hilgarde. I am his brother." Turning from the
crestfallen singer he hurried into the car.